 with a cane standing in the doorway with several Secret Service agents. "I am the Lord your God. Thou shalt worship no other God before me." Boy, those were the days, huh? Al. What do we got here, C.J.? Mary. Yes. Reverend? Of course. No. On the other hand, I do think that five dollars is too high a price to pay for pornography. No. Let’s not, C.J. These people won’t be staying that long. May I have some coffee, Mr. Lewis? Al, how many times have I asked you to denounce the practices of a fringe group that calls itself The Lambs of God? Crap. It is up to you, Al. You, know, my wife, Abbey, she never wants me to do anything while I’m upset.  Except I forgot to open the garage door. Abbey told me to not drive while I was upset and she was right. She was right yesterday when she told me not to get on that damn bicycle while I was upset, but I did it anyway, and I guess I was just about as angry as I’ve ever been in my life. It seems my granddaughter, Annie, had given an interview in one of the teen magazines. And somewhere between movie stars and make-up tips, she talked about her feelings on a woman’s right to choose. Now Annie, all of 12, has always been precocious, but she’s got a good head on her shoulders and I like it when she uses it, so I couldn’t understand it when her mother called me in tears yesterday. I said, "Elizabeth, what’s wrong?" She said, "It’s Annie." Now I love my family and I’ve read my bible from cover to cover so I want you to tell me, from what part of the Holy Scripture do you suppose the Lambs of God drew their Divine inspiration when they sent my 12 year-old granddaughter a Raggedy Ann doll with a knife stuck through its throat?  C.J., show these people out. Find it now. "Hello, Mr. President. Did you have a nice trip, sir? How’s the ankle, sir?" Seems to me we’ve all been taking a little break. Thinking about our personal lives or thinking about keeping our jobs. Breaks are good. It’s not a bad idea taking a break every now and then. I know how hard you all work.  With the clothes on their backs, they came through a storm. And the ones that didn’t die want a better life. And they want it here. Talk about impressive. My point is this: Break’s over. Josh. "Too busy being indicted for tax fraud"?  Don’t ever do it again.  Mrs. Landingham. What’s next? That’s no good. Jaworski knows that’s no good. Americans need to buy more American cars. Good morning everyone. What do you got? I heard. You’re kidding. The Ryder Cup team? I know what the Ryder Cup team is. Thanks Mrs. Landingham.  I’ve got an intelligence briefing, a security briefing, and a 90-minute budget meeting all scheduled for the same 45 minutes. You sure this is a good time to talk about my sense of humor? Me neither. I know. I know. It makes a difference. I think I was there. C.J., on your tombstone, it’s gonna read, “Post hoc, ergo propter hoc.” Twenty-seven lawyers in the room, anybody know “post hoc, ergo propter hoc?” Josh? Thank you. Next? Leo? After it, therefore because of it. It means one thing follows the other, therefore it was caused by the other, but it’s not always true. In fact, it’s hardly ever true. We did not lose Texas because of the hat joke. Do you know when we lost Texas? Go figure. What’s in Jordan? You should stay here. We got Amman, a woman, little kids, the works. See, that was a joke. Everybody’s a critic today. So what’s in Amman? Good for you. How long are you gonna stay? When do you leave? What’s my temperature? Fahrenheit?  So how’s the kid? Can she spell anything yet? Got any pictures? Thank you, Nancy. Oh, she’s beautiful. What’s her name? That name’s got a hell of a past. Your wife’s beautiful too. How’d you get her to marry you? Did you trick her or something? Yeah, I figured.  Morris, I made a joke about golfers yesterday, and now it consumes the whole damn building. Jokes like that are part of my folksy charm, Morris. It’s the very heart of my popularity. Oh, we’re having some difficulty getting the word out. Oh, thank you. Is this from this morning, Carol?  So how’s my pulse? No. Yeah. Yeah.  Yeah, why not? Two Dewars on the rocks, Mrs. Landingham. I had a meeting this morning with the Joint Chiefs.  I’m an accomplished man, Morris. I can sit comfortably with prime ministers and Presidents, even the pope. Why is it every time I sit with the Joint Chiefs, I feel like I’m back at my father’s dinner table. You’re a naval officer. You’re a doctor in a uniform.  It’s not like I’m totally without experience, you know. You’re talking to a former governor. I was commander-in-chief of the New Hampshire National Guard. Didn’t have to. We’d just stand on the border and stare you down. Then we’d all go for pancakes. Like you had a lot of closed infantry combat training in premed, huh? What is that? I don’t need a flu shot. How do I know this isn’t the start of a military coup? I want the Secret Service in here right away. Now that’s a thought that’s gonna fester. Thank you. I’m not comfortable with violence.  I know this country has enemies, but I don’t feel violent toward any of them. I don’t know whether that’s a weakness or not, but I think I know how the Joint Chiefs would answer that question. And the red meat. Don’t forget your picture. Corey’s a beautiful child. You didn’t do nothing, mister. You were a passenger on this one. Your job is to pay the bills, and do what these ladies tell you to do. Also, you got to teach her how to whistle. Her mother won’t do that. I’ll see you next week, Morris. Right.  Morris? Look at that picture again. See? The past isn’t the only thing your family can be proud of. Go away. I do, indeed. Mr. White, good to see you. Mr. Finley... Mrs. Landingham? I’m done, right? All righty. Thank you. What’s in the bag? It’s a shirt. They left me a shirt? I think they left me something else, Mrs. Landingham. I think they left me 12 center-cut prime fillet Omaha Steaks, Mrs. Landingham. I was going to have Mario fix me one of those steaks tonight. You stole my steaks. You are a cattle rustler, Mrs. Landingham. Between you and Dr. Tolliver, who needs a wife or a mother? What time is it? Where is the Syrian ambassador? Tel Aviv and London? Alright, uh...  I’m gonna call Morris’ wife now. I’ll meet you in the Situation Room. Leo? I am not frightened. I’m gonna blow them off the face of the earth with the fury of God’s own thunder.  Get the commanders. This is crap. It’s been three days. This is amateur hour. Cashman and Berryhill are dragging their feet. Cashman and Berryhill are trying to make me look like a clown. And State should concern itself with what I damn well tell ‘em to be concerned with! So I’ve discovered. Good morning. Good morning.  Uh, Mrs. Landingham, I can’t seem to find my glasses anywhere. Can you please do whatever it is you do when I can’t find my glasses? It’s been 72 hours Leo. That’s more than three days since they blew him out of the sky. And I’m tired of waiting dammit! This is candy ass! We are going to draw up a response scenario today, I’m going to give the order today, we’re going to strike back today. What? You think I’m taking this personally. Why the hell shouldn’t I take this personally? Americans were on that plane. I met Morris four or five times, let’s not do this like he was my son.  Mrs. Landingham! I can’t fine my glasses anywhere. Thank you.  What did you want to say? You sure? All right, I’ll see you in an hour. Keep your seats.  What have we got? What is the virtue of a proportional response? What’s the virtue of a proportional response? Why’s it good?  They hit an airplane, so we hit a transmitter, right? That’s a proportional response. They hit a barracks, so we hit two transmitters? It’s what we do. I mean this is what we do. Well, if it’s what we do, if it’s what we’ve always done, don’t they know we’re going to do it? I have turned my attention to Pericles One, it’s two ammo dumps, an abandoned railroad bridge and a Syrian intelligence agency. But they know we’re going to do that, they know we’re going to do that. Those areas have been abandoned for four days. We know that from the satellites. We have the intelligence. They did that, so we did this, it’s the cost of doing business, it’s been factored in, right? Am I right or am I missing something here? Then I ask again, what is the virtue of a proportional response? It is not all there is. A disproportional response. Let the word ring forth from this time and this place, you kill an American, any American, we don’t come back with a proportional response, we come back  with total disaster! General, I am suggesting that you and Admiral Fitzwallace and Secretary Hutchinson and the rest of the national security team take the next sixty minutes and put together a U.S. response scenario that doesn’t make me think we are just docking somebody’s damn allowance!  Keep your seats. There’s a delegation of cardiologists having their pictures taken in the Blue Room. You wouldn’t think you could find a group of people more arrogant than the fifteen of us, but there they are right upstairs in the Blue Room. You called me?  Does anyone have a cigarette? This other plan... Pericles One. No civilian causalities? But you’re as certain as you can be? And what are the military implications? Very well.  How does this work? Fifty buck crime.  What happened to paragraph nine? I’m sorry, paragraph eight. Well, I want to see it again. I can’t look at anything fellas. Mrs. Landingham! I need my glasses! When do we get the BDA? Why!? So what’s the problem? Oh, for crying out loud, will somebody get on the phone to CNN and find out if we hit anything! Thank you! Now if I had my glasses. This has been since this morning, we could have brought in an optometrist by now. I don’t need an optometrist now, thank you Nancy. I just need to glasses he prescribed. I got the briefing on the phoenix. The phoenix. I got the briefing on the phoenix last night, I studied the report, Hutchinson was there, in my private study. The phoenix, the A61, the sparrow, and the sidewinder. Are we covered? Very well. For want of a pair of glasses. Thank you.  Aw, crap. I can’t see anything with those. What!? What of it? Who is this? I don’t have anytime for new people now! What do you need, Leo?  Did you know that two thousand years ago a Roman citizen could walk across the face of the known world free of the fear of molestation? He could walk across the earth unharmed, cloaked only in the words ‘Civis Romanis’ I am a Roman citizen. So great was the retribution of Rome, universally understood as certain, should any harm befall even one of its citizens. Where was Morris’ protection, or anyone else on that plane? Where is the retribution for the families and where is the warning to the rest of the world that Americans shall walk this earth unharmed, lest the clenched fist of the most mighty military force in the history of mankind comes crashing down on your house!? In other words, Leo, what the hell are we doing here? Well our behavior has produced some pretty crappy results. In fact, I’m not a hundred percent sure it hasn’t induced them. I’m talking about two hundred and eight-six American marines in Beirut, I’m talking about Somalia, I’m talking about Nairobi. You’re damn right. He had a ten-day-old baby at home. We are doing nothing. They dest... And this is good? Which they’ll rebuild again in six months. Why didn’t you say so?  When I think of all the work you did to get me elected. I could pommel your ass with a baseball bat. Oh, I like anything that starts with ‘Bertram Coles’. Let’s have it. Bert’s calling me out? Ziegler must be ballistic. Oh, by the way, who was that kid before? The one who figured out where my glasses are? What’s his story?  Excuse me Charlie. Can I see you inside please? Come on, it’s okay. I’m Jed Bartlet. But you prefer Charlie, right? Listen, Leo McGarry filled me in on the situation with your mother, I’m so very sorry. I hope you don’t mind but I took the liberty of calling Tom Connolly, the FBI Director. We had the computer spit out some quick information, you’re mother was killed by a Western .38 Revolver firing K.T.W.s, or what are known as ‘Cop Killer bullets’, now we have not had a whole lot of success banning that weapon and those bullets off the streets, but we’re planning on taking a big whack at it when Congress gets back from recess. So, what do you say, you wanna come help us out? Thanks. You tell me. My granddaughter gave me this tie. Get away from me. Somebody throw this guy out of the building! My fellow Americans, good evening. A short while ago I ordered our Armed Forces to attack and destroy four military targets in Northern Syria, this in response to the unwarranted, unprovoked... ...and cold-blooded downing three days ago of an unarmed Air Force jet carrying 58 passengers and the flag of the United States. One night he went in and set the briefcase down and said, “Bess, why do you suppose it is that only sons-of-bitches know how to lick a stamp?”  The point is, friends, you’ve got to write the letter, you’ve got to send a fax, you’ve got to pick up the phone and call Western Union. You’ve got to contact your Congressional representative... You’ve got to say “Mister, I’ve got a friend who’s neighbor is dead... “...Madam, I’ve got a neighbor whose friend is dead, whose husband is dead, whose mother is dead, kids are dead! Kids are dead! “...and I wanna know, mister. I wanna know, madam... ...how you intend to vote on Wednesday, so that I’ll know how to vote next election...” You gotta ask ‘em. You gotta ask ‘em!  You know, I had a civil procedure professor who said once... He said, “When the law is on your side, argue the law; and when the facts are on your side, argue the facts... ...When you don’t have the law on your side, when you don’t have the facts on your side, bang your fist on the defense table as loud as you can.” Well, we’ve got the law on our side now, and we’ve got the facts on our side now... ...bang our fist on the defense table, but we’re not listening any more. We’re not having that any more. We’re gonna win on Wednesday. We’re gonna win on Wednesday! Thank you all.  God bless you, and God bless America! Thank you. Thank you. Good night.  Toby! What’d you think? I thought you would. Oh, you noticed that, did you? Yes. I did a little polish right up there on my feet. Right in front of everybody. I looked to the side at one point, you know. I half expected to see you coming at me with a salad fork. Yup. Thank God for the secret service.  Hey there, fella. She deserves a nice room and some supper.  Hey, Charlie! What’d you think of the speech? Yes, you. I mean the entire speech, Charlie, and in particular the delivery. See! See, I think what Charlie’s trying to say is that in this case the singer outdistanced the song. You know what, Toby? You’re what my mother calls a pain in the ass. Yes, Charlie. By the way, did the First Lady call? My back is fine. Those damn things make me goofy. You don’t have to describe her tone to me, Charlie. I’ve been married to it for 32 years. Give me the medicine, Charlie.  Thank you. Have a good night. I’ll see you in the morning.  Thank you all. Hey! Oh, I feel fine. Hmm? Absolutely no need. I’m fine. What’s going on here? I like to...  ...get involved. I don’t mind telling you C.J. I was in a little pain there. I wasn’t supposed to take ‘em both? No no no. Sit sit sit. One of you’s got a problem and I’m here to help. You guys are like family. You’ve always been there for me, always been loyal. Honest, hard working, good people, and I love you all very much. I don’t say that often enough. So tell me what the problem is, Toby.  Sam, of course you are. Toby.  Toby’s a nice name, don’t you think? No, no, no, no. Please, Leo. I know my body. I mean, you know, my muscles are not, you know, but my mind is sharp. I can focus. I’m focused. You all know that about me. Here’s what I think we ought to do...  Was I just saying something? Hot damn! Now you’re talking. Ah. Done. Toby, you’re a great writer, do you know that? Here, give me a hug. Come on. Give us a hug.  There you go. Charlie! Charlie’s a great name. I’m going. I’m going.  I’m seriously thinking about getting a dog. Maybe an Irish setter, Charlie. What do you think? Oh, man. I’m sorry. I’m fine. Why would I want to do that? All right, game point. Let’s go. I’m playing. Take the ball out, Toby. Take the ball out. Let’s go. You want to play or write my eulogy? Mr. Grant! I’m making a substitution. Mr. Grant’s a new member of my team. Mr. Grant is a federal employee. I beg your pardon? When have I ever cheated? And she did! Well, I will admit that the woman bore a striking resemblance... Be that as it may, Toby Ziegler, Josh Lyman, Charlie Young. I would like to introduce Mr. Rodney Grant. Mr. Grant is Associate Director of the President’s Council on Physical Fitness. Game point. Your ball. Let’s go! What? What’s the problem? Take the ball out, Toby. Game point. Let’s go. The new man. Let the poets write about that there, Byron. No, Helen, I don’t. The U.S. economy is fundamentally... From the... Miami Herald? But, your voice sounded the same as when you did Helen. No, not at all. The U.S. economy remains fundamentally strong as the steady decline in unemployment reflects, which I think is cause for satisfaction, not gloom. The solitary aberrant spike in the P.P.I. is not cause for overreaction. I AM an economics professor with a big old stick up my butt, but I’ll do my best for you there, Mandy. We don’t need to do guns. I’m not saying they’re not gonna ask about them, Toby. I’m saying I’m all set.  Is it time for my 10 a.m. scolding? Let’s do guns. Let’s do guns, Sam. Yes, next question. Ah! Mr. Ziegler from the Coney Island Killjoy. You have a follow up? Yes. ‘Cause I’m weak-willed and stupid. Then I talked it over with some other people. I have lots of other people.  Oh, for God’s sakes Toby! I’m not gonna come out and say the bill we just passed is worthless. Yeah, my answer was gonna be “because I said so,” but you did pretty good. What’s your point?  Well, on behalf of everybody in the west wing, Toby, let me just say that that’s a relief.  I think this press conference is about we haven’t had a press conference in a while. We’re going too. Leo’s not talking about the portion being accounted for as off budget and particularly not the long-term capital outlays. Ten years ago, the federal budget had a deficit of 22 billion dollars but the national debt rose... ...from 5.2 trillion to 5.4 trillion in the same fiscal year. Thank you. That’s a debt increase of 188 million against a 22 billion dollar deficit.  Oh, this is good news.  Zoey’s coming for dinner. Yeah.  My daughter’s starting Georgetown after the first and she’s scouting off-campus housing. Guys, we’re done. I’m sorry, but some of my staff has been waiting and they haven’t had the chance to bother me for a couple of hours. Thanks so much. I’m gonna make chili! I’ll make it for everybody. Charlie! My friends, my daughter, my beer, and some chili. Yes! Ah, Charlie. My youngest daughter, Zoey, is down from Hanover. I’m making chili tonight. It’s her favorite. The first lady’s in Pakistan. I can eat whatever I want. I’m gonna need some ingredients. Don’t ever listen to him. Look, Mrs. Landingham’s got it all written down somewhere. Just tell her to give it to the steward’s office. And send everyone else in. Thank you, Charlie!  God, I was right? Everyone! Come in. Come on in. Hey, listen up everybody. Zoey’s down from Hanover. I’m making chili for everyone tonight.  All right...You know what? Let’s do this. Everybody look down at the big seal in the middle of my carpet. Now, everybody look back up at me. Zoey’s coming down from Hanover and I’m making chili for everyone tonight. There, you see how benevolent I can be, when everyone does what I tell them to do. Now sit down.   Cause it’s Hollywood. Who gives a damn? Why can’t we do both? No. Because Sam is right. It’s not that Larry Posner’s movies have gratuitous sex and gratuitous violence. It’s that they suck. They’re terrible. But people go to see them because they have gratuitous sex and gratuitous violence. Now, if we could just get people to stop going to see crappy movies, Posner would stop making them. I promise you.  Do I look like Joe McCarthy to you, Toby? Chili, tonight! Sam, it’s all about mastering the fundamentals, see? Got to keep your hands up, your feet moving on defense. Pass and get open or find the open man, and follow his shot on offense. See, I am a master of fundamentals, and that is why my team so thoroughly dominated your team.  Leo, kids don’t understand the fundamentals. Mrs. Landingham, are you drunk? I just like asking. Oh, give it up. Where’s Zoey?  No, I guess not. Yes.  Yes. We were up all night on that one, Toby. Me and Leo and Josh. They were screaming at me, “Governor, for God’s sakes, it’s got to be Toby. It’s got to be Toby.” When I held my ground, and we went to David Rosen, and Rosen said he wanted to take a partnership at Solomon Brothers, thank God... I couldn’t live without you Toby. I mean it. I’d be in the tall grass. I’d be in the weeds... I know I disappoint you sometimes. I mean I can sense your disappointment. And I only get mad because I know you’re right a lot of the times, but you are not the kid in the class with his hand up and whatever it was you said to C.J. You are a wise and brilliant man, Toby... The other night when we were playing basketball, did you mean what you said? My demons were shouting down the better angels in my brain? You think that’s what’s stopping me from greatness? I suppose you’re right. Thank you, Toby.  Now, go away. Behind her, Josh looks at the door window and sneaks in. Zoey, not taking a look, smiles as she realizes that Josh came in. From behind, Josh tries to surprise her. Josh! We’ve been looking for you. Look at this, will you? I don’t know why, but nothing makes me feel quite so good as the sight of colleagues, enjoying each other outside work. We were talking about these women. Look at C.J. She’s like a fifties movie star, so capable, so loving and energetic. Mrs. Landingham. Did you guys know she lost two sons in Vietnam? What would make her want to serve her country is beyond me, but in 14 years, she’s not missed a day’s work, not one.  There’s Cathy, Donna, and Margaret. Uh, excuse me! Thank you. Uh, friends, please... Well, chili’s ready and I hope you all enjoy it. In fact, since I told you you would enjoy it, I’m reasonably certain that you will. You know, of course, the first lady’s in Pakistan.  I’m not entirely sure why, but I have learned it’s a pretty good idea not to ask my wife too many questions as it seldom leads to anything but further confusion. I miss her very much, but I’m delighted our beautiful daughter, Zoey is here. You know, she’s starting Georgetown in the spring. This, prior to medical school and a life of celibacy. It’s an incredible adventure you’re starting on, sweetheart. An amazing four years full of people and experiences you haven’t yet dreamed of. And if you will allow me just one minute of business, please. I hope that by the time we’re done with our four years here, we’ll have seen to it that every young person who chooses can go to college and beyond, regardless of their economic status. I understand that today was another one of Leo’s “big block of cheese” days! You all start out so cynical, but it never fails. By the end of the day, there’s always one or two converts, right? And today was no exception. C.J. Cregg is gonna be up all night writing a position paper for the interior department on the necessity of wildlife protection.  C.J., I don’t mind the cost of this wolves-only highway. It’s the segregation. The ACLU is gonna file a petition on behalf of some reindeer and then we’re all screwed. Sam Seaborn had a guy who spotted a UFO today, am I right? Sam laughed him out of his office, but you’ve been thinking about it ever since. But you can rest assured, Sam. It was not a spaceship from another planet, just another time. A long since abandoned Soviet satellite, one of its booster rockets didn’t fire and it couldn’t escape the earth’s orbit--a sad reminder of a time when two powerful nations challenged each other and then boldly raced into outer space.  There is one fruit... There is one fruit... There is one fruit... There is one fruit whose seeds are on the outside. Name it please. No. I bet five. It’s the strawberry. Yes you did Toby, and I thought it was a bold move when you consider that Leo’s holding the six you’re looking for. That depends... There are fourteen punctuation marks in Standard English grammar. Can anyone name them please? That’s only seven. There are seven more. There are three words, and three words only in the English language that begin with the letters DW. Can anyone name them for me please? Yes. Yes. Yes. I see you five and raise you five by the way. “Witches brew a magic spell, in an enchanted forest where fairies...” Well, the answer’s correct but let’s check with our judges and -- oh no, I’m sorry, time’s expired. My time. Trip nines. Kiss Jenny for me. Charlie, I’m headed over to the residence, you’re done for the night. Don’t stay up too late son. All right.  What body of water in South America is formed by the confluence...? Not quite up on your South American geography are you my friend? Saved by the bell. What tripped the alarm? She? It wasn’t a fraternity stunt? Well, you know, just trying to kill me isn’t necessarily evidence of being mentally unbalanced! I wasn’t? Who was? Zoey? Leo. You know Ron Butterfield? He says it was a woman! Of course.  This woman was after Zoey? There’s no need for Zoey to know about this right? What do you need? Hang on a second. What’ve you got Ron? Well, I guess that’s something.  You were saying? You sure?  I guess we’re done too. No, no. You too.  Ron? Did she have a gun? Okay. Thank you.  I’m on a conference call with the postmaster general. I honestly couldn’t tell you. Look, I want you to do me a favor. Take Charlie out for a beer tonight. Yeah. The kid has no life. You’re the only guy around here he knows at all. Take him out for a couple of beers, you guys come back, we’ll all watch the vote in Leo’s office. Good, thanks. Let me give you some cash.  Don’t be silly. You sure? Truth be known, I don’t have any cash on me. I don’t carry cash anymore. I don’t carry keys either. How’s it going in there? I appreciate it. Thanks. Yeah. Sure. Yes? I’ll take the call wherever I am when he calls, I guess. I’m not adopting a tone. I’m just trying to get out of here. I’m saying no. I just want to go home. Goodnight Mrs. Landingham.  I heard it’s done? Good. I’m headed over to the residence. Sure. You’re kidding me? Leo, you’re kidding me?! What happened? Don’t tell me nothing happened, Leo. I know you. I know Jenny. Married couples like you don’t just get divorced. Not cause nothing happened! I want to talk to Jenny. I don’t understand how this happened Leo. You and Jenny were happy! Because you weren’t spending enough time with her? Marriage needs attention Leo. It can’t run on autopilot. Come on. It’s not your prom date we’re talking about here. We’re talking about your family! You can’t blame this on me. When did it happen? And you’re just now telling me?  Fix this, Leo. It IS as simple as that. You’re the man. Fix it. Fix it. Goodnight Leo. What happened? Did you do anything at all to provoke these guys? Were you flirting with them? Zoey, you flirt with guys. So what were you doing? What the hell were you doing drinking? I’m gonna up your protection. Yes. Starting tomorrow. Well you’ll have plenty of friends to walk you to class. Zoey! You’re getting this part of your life. Oh please. Look, the Secret Service... They are worried about me getting shot. I’m worried about me getting shot. But that is nothing compared to how terrified we are of you. You scare the hell out of the Secret Service Zoey, and you scare the hell out of me too. My getting killed would be bad enough, but that is not the nightmare scenario. The nightmare scenario, sweetheart, is YOU getting kidnapped. You go out to a bar or a party in some club, and you get up to go to the restroom, somebody comes up from behind, puts their hand across your mouth, and whisks you out the back door. You’re so petrified, you don’t even notice the bodies of two secret service agents lying on the ground with bullet holes in their heads. Then you’re whisked away in a car. It’s a big party with lots of noise, and lots of people coming and going. And It’s a half hour before someone says, “Hey where’s Zoey?” Another 15 minutes before the first phone call. Another hour and a half before anyone even THINKS to shut down all the airports. Now we’re off to the races. You’re tied to a chair in a cargo shack, somewhere in the middle of Uganda. And I’m told that I have 72 hours to get Israel to free 460 terrorist prisoners. So I’m on the phone pleading with Benjamin and he’s saying, “I’m sorry Mr. President, but Israel simply does not negotiate with terrorists, period. It’s the only way we can survive.” So now we’ve got a new problem, because this country no longer has a commander in chief, it has a father who’s out of his mind because his little girl is in a shack somewhere in Uganda with a gun to her head. DO YOU GET IT?!  I’m sorry I yelled sweetheart. Forgive me. Honey, I want you to have your freedom and your youth. I want you to have common everyday experiences with girls your own age. But don’t ever forget - this is a privilege, and it is an experience that must be cherished beyond measure. And proper protection and security, though at times I admit, it’s a drag, is never too high a price to pay. It’s alright sweetheart. It’s alright. Goodnight, sweetheart. I love you. Don’t get up! Hi. Before, when I was being an idiot, there was something I forgot to say. I’m sorry. I would like unanimous consent to revise and extend my remarks. I don’t know what the hell was the matter with me, Leo. If there’s anything I can do to help, anything? Josh? What were you doing taking my daughter out to a bar? I told you to take Charlie. When Zoey said she was going I just assumed you were gonna go have malteds or something. Yes. Well anyway. Thank you for doing whatever it was you did.  Charlie? Sam, you come too please.  You know, I once played the stage manager in a production of Our Town. Charlie, you a good poker player? Excellent, get your money out and take a seat. Punished? No. Because I said so. Good evening. Good work both of you. You bought us some time. C.J., deal the cards. How many people live in the United States? She’s not worried about the length of your question, she’s worried about the length of my response. We’re having salmon tonight. They told you that? Yo-yo Ma is going to play.  Do you like salmon? Well... our mistake. She’d like you to say a little more on the subject. Okay. Which one? I try not to look out my window that much, Danny. What protestors? Vermeil? Thank you. Leo... Absolutely.  Excuse me, folks. I can’t decide if that man is boring or rude, but he’s one or the other. I’m sitting out there trying to figure out how this guy campaign for something and win, then I remembered--we usually rig the elections. You think it’s important he sit at my table tonight? Where are you sitting? Where’s Toby sitting? Ah, that’s the fun table. What do you need? Because of the hurricane? All right, fine. Sorry to keep you waiting.  Did I mention we’re having salmon tonight? No, of course not. You want to raid this house? All right, Mandy. Thank you. Josh? Would you two give us a minute, please? the press she’d be wearing. Without warning? The hurricane just shifted direction without any warning? I would think. Captain? How big is this carrier group? How many men and how many ships? How soon before the worst of it starts? Is there any way I can speak with the fleet commander? All right. Let’s do it. Thank you. Any word on the FBI guy’s condition? What do I do now? How are we doing? Hungry? Tired? Talk to me for five minutes apiece and then we’re going to settle this. Stay standing. Time’s up. Yes, I know. But I got tired of listening to you. Now you listen to me. I have a Nobel Prize in Economics and I’m here to tell you that none of you know what the hell you’re talking about. At 12:01 am, I’m using my executive power to nationalize the trucking industry. Fourteen White House lawyers disagree. Truman did it in ‘52 with the coalmine. In 50 years, there’s a new bench and I’ll take my chances. As for Labor, I am calling Congress into Emergency Session to grant me the authority to draft the truckers into military service. You’re going to love our food. Nice talking to you folks. If this isn’t settled in 47 minutes, don’t worry. We know where to find you.  Hey... I’m all right.  I approved a plan for an FBI negotiator. He’s in surgery now. What the hell? Well, if this isn’t a metaphor for powerlessness, I don’t know what is. We better get back to work, huh? We got the fleet commander? So, I guess I’m going to talk to the Captain of the Hickory? Is there somebody on there now?  You’re kidding. Hello?  Hello? Anyone there? Hickory, this is the White House. Who am I speaking to? Son? This is President Bartlet.  Hello? Is your C.O. around? Can I talk to you in the meantime?  Hello? Are you all right, Harold? Are you bleeding? Can you put something on it? You go over and get it. I’ll stay right here. Harold?  Harold, are you back? Can you tell us what’s going on? Harold? We’re here. Can you tell us what’s going on? Well, I don’t know, man. Sounds pretty bad, Harold. I think I’m going to ask for my money back.  Harold? I’m going to stay right here, as long as the radio works, okay? Hang on. Yellowstone, established by an act signed by Ulysses S. Grant was the nation’s first national park - March 1, 1872.  Well, we’re through with work, Josh, but this part’s fun. The part where I get you to sit down, and teach you a little something. Yeah. No. I’m a national park buff, Josh.  I said I’m a national park buff. I bet you didn’t know that about me. Why is that? Really? I assume that was said with all due respect.  Is it nerd-like to know that Everglades National Park is the largest remaining subtropical wilderness in the continental United States, AND has extensive mangrove forests? There are 54 national parks in the country, Josh. I HAVE been to all of them. I should show you my slide collection.  Grand Canyon, Bryce Canyon, Badlands, Capitol Reef, Acadia, which is so often overlooked... Dry Tortugas... Petrified Forests, North Cascades, Joshua Tree, Shenandoah National Park, right here in Virginia!  What was that? See, and I was gonna let you go home. We’re gonna talk about Yosemite. We beat the Banking Lobby! We beat them. Yep. It’s in the bag. Ooh, C.J., Everglades National Park is one of the biggest... Right. I got to take this call so I can gloat about the Banking Bill. Be talking about this C.J. This is the story!  Crunch them!  Oh, incidentally, the California Live Oak is the... Right. Twelfth round knockout, C.J.! [] This is the saddest looking cabinet I have ever... look at this. I have an agriculture secretary who hasn’t eaten a vegetable in his life. Everybody sit down. You’re freaking me out. Good morning, Leo. Hello. Are you taking minutes? What’s your name? Mildred? I’m Josiah Bartlet. I’m the President of the United States. What did I miss? Uh, would you skip down, please? Actually, I find these meeting to be a fairly mind-numbing experience, but Leo assures me that they are Constitutionally required, so let’s get it over with. Proceed, Mildred. Who said that? Our first goal should be finding a way to work with Congress? You don’t think our first goal is should be finding a way to best serve the American People? Really? Let’s have a look.  Yeah, that’s what it says right here. Would you like Mildred to read it back again? Okay. Anything else? Good. Now let’s get to work. In Montana? What happened? Eaton and Broderick? Eaton and Broderick attached a land-use rider? I’m surprised Eaton and Broderick had taken an interest in anything. For what? What did I do to them during the campaign? They want to strip-mine Big Sky? Yeah. Excuse me, fellas, over here please. What do you do, Josh? Toby. Leo. I don’t like these people, Toby. I don’t want to lose. All right. What’s next? Hey. No, don’t get up. No, it’s fine. Please. Nah, I just came to see what you were doing. Nah, you know, we had most of the night blocked for that thing, and it got cancelled so... Nah.  Nah. I still got 400 pages of nonsense to read. I don’t like rattling around in that place with no one around but the butlers. Maybe later. You had breakfast with Mal? How’s she doing? What did you expect? You ignored her mother. No, I’m saying that’s what it looks like to her right now. She doesn’t see what the job is, Leo. And anyone would have to see it to believe it. And even if they saw it, even if they believed it, what would it matter? She’s her mother’s daughter, and you made her mother cry. Well, I’m right next door all night. Okay. Well, this is fine. They had you write this? You’re not a little overqualified for a birthday message? Really? I appreciate it, Sam.  Listen... I mean as long as you’re on it, and you don’t mind, why don’t we take advantage of your being on it and, you know, really do a job? It’s his fiftieth birthday. Let’s give it the Sam Seaborn quill. What do you think? Good. Take your time. Bring me back the next draft when it’s ready. I really appreciate it, Sam. Hey, C.J. No, sit down. When are Josh and Toby gonna come up with a solution, huh? I want the banking bill, and I don’t want to give in. Yeah. I don’t want to hear about Hoynes and the cabinet meeting. Is Danny gonna make it a thing? What did you have to give him?  Sold. Sure he was. You’re wrong. Mildred? Let’s drop it. Anything else? Okay. Get out of here. Hey, Mal. Margaret!  Hey, you’re all dressed up. Yes, uh, could you bring me the chief of staff’s schedule for today, please? Thank you.  You look a little glum, Mallory. Did you have plans to go out this evening with someone who had to cancel due to circumstances beyond their control because they have made a commitment to a common and higher purpose? Oh, thank you Margaret.  How’d that go by the way? Cool. He received a security briefing, a Central American briefing, and wrote a position paper, and he’s been counseling me throughout the day of a bad decision I have to make. Oh, and by the way, this was a very light day. Uh... that’s a perfectly fair question. Okay. I’m right next-door.  Oh, my point is... give your dad a break. He’s your father. Are you blowing me off? Okay. Yes?  Yeah, okay. How are you, John? Good. What can I do for you? C.J. already talked to Danny Concannon. I think we’re fine. Well, that’s a different story. Okay. Good night, John. John? John... Really? You shouldn’t have made me beg, John. I was asking you to be Vice President. Then don’t stand there and ask the question, John. It weakened me right out of the gate. You shouldn’t have made me beg. Yeah. Good night, John.  Both black and grizzly bears inhabit Glacier Park, Charlie. And hikers are told to talk or sing along the trail to keep them at bay. It’s not as silly as it sounds. I suppose. Yes, Glacier Park was the tenth. We have 44 to go. Have a good night, Charlie.  What have you got? I can do this? You understand it’s a bunch of rocks, right?  More than a right, Josh. It’s a treat. You would enjoy nature. The antiquities act! This is simplicity itself. Good job. Thank you. Good night.  Thank you. Good night.  Yeah? What? Yeah. Good night. I heard we may have... I can call him? It’s done? This is huge. Which one of you is the man? Mrs. Landingham, let’s make the phone call! Thank you. You too.  Thank you. You’re too young to retire, Joseph.  Yes sir. He’s on the short list. Yeah. We’ll make our announcement on Thursday. I haven’t made a decision yet, Joseph. Mendoza was on the short list. That’s not true, Joseph. Excuse me, sir... I suppose we should get out there. I’m sorry Joseph, but I am... You’ve said quite a few words. Let’s get out there. Joseph, when the next seat opens up, I promise you... In three years, I would hope to be running for reel... That’s a little pessimistic, Joseph. You know I imagine the view from your largely unscrutinized place in history must be very different from mine. But I remind you sir, that I have the following things to negotiate: an opposition Congress, special interests with power beyond belief, and a bitchy media. Well, I am not Harry Truman.  It’s “Dr. Bartlet,” your honor. Now, let’s go start your retirement. A quick confirmation’s gonna be good for us. That’s a blowout, Leo. Just what the doctor ordered.  Thank you. Good morning, Mrs. Landingham. When is Harrison getting in? Good. Good morning, Charlie. Peyton Cabot Harrison. Find out what kind of cigars he likes, what kind of perfume his wife likes, and have them sent over to their hotel, okay? Yeah. We’re using back channels. What is going on with Lillienfield? Fine. We’re gonna get this done, right? All right. I’m on my way. Thank you. Leo? We looked at everybody, right? The short list. We looked at Mendoza? Leo... Yeah, you’re right. I’ll see you later. Good morning, gentlemen. Sorry to keep you waiting. Let’s go. Good morning. Good morning. Hang on a second. Good morning. Keep your seats. Good morning. Good morning, Toby. Do this for me. Put together some information on Roberto Mendoza. No. I just want to be able to know something. There’s gonna be a lot of questions. I don’t want it to be “we had a Hispanic on the short list.” The reason we didn’t go with him. Let’s do better than that. Uh, what’s going on with this drug thing? All right. I’ll trust ya. Thank you. Good morning, Sam. Here’s an interesting statement.  “I join Judge Black, insomuch as while enjoying my privacy, I am compelled to admit that government has a right to invade it unless specifically prohibited by some specific Constitutional provision.” Unquote. Why isn’t this ever been brought up? We spent two months vetting our homerun nominee, he doesn’t believe in a privacy guarantee, and it never came up?  When does Harrison get in? I want him first thing in the morning. When was the last time either of you slept, I don’t care. Get ready for this. Excuse me. I want to meet Mendoza. Judge Harrison, first thing’s first, are you the author of this unsigned note? When I was 26, I wrote a paper supporting the deregulation of Far East trade barriers. Nearly got thrown out of the London School of Economics. I was young and stupid, and trying to make some noise. I’m gonna bring Toby Ziegler and Sam Seaborn in here and talk about this a little bit. Okay. Charlie, please? Peyton, do I have the right to put on an ugly plaid jacket and a loud polka-dot tie and walk down Main Street? Where in the Constitution is that right guaranteed? What about the use of cream in my coffee? Surely, there can be no free speech argument to be made there? So you have no objection to the state of New Hampshire passing a law banning use of cream in coffee? As I lose the votes of coffee drinkers everywhere. This Sam is young, drives me nuts too, but he took you off for a ride, sir, because that’s what I told him to do. I understand, Peyton. Could you give us a little time, please? We’ll make you comfortable while you’re waiting. Thank you. You don’t think the guy who called Sam wouldn’t know how to call a senator’s office? Toby? I’m sure we’re almost done. Sam, what else you got? You need me, Leo? Would you excuse me? What is it, Leo? Lillienfield? He knows? We? What does Josh say? Josh is a smart guy. We used to be too. Did you have a drink yesterday? Are you gonna have one today? That’s all you ever have to say to me. You fought in a war, got me elected, and you run the country. I think we all owe you one, don’t you? Did Harrison get off okay? Why? I’ll bet it has.  Do you have any more questions, Sam? Toby? Judge Mendoza, would it surprise you to learn that for the past few months, your name has been in the short list of candidates for the bench? Well, then this is gonna knock your socks off. Tomorrow evening at 5 o’clock, I am naming you as my nominee to be the next associate justice of the United States Supreme Court. You were not the first choice, but you are the last one, and the right one.  Will you accept the nomination? Good. Thank you. Sam and Toby will be in charge of your confirmation. What do you say, Leo? You up for a good fight? Good. Let the good fight begin. Mr. Justice Mendoza! Oh that sounded pretty weak to me. Let’s try it again.  That’s better. Now who are all these people making a ruckus and tracking up my floor?  You! What’s your name? And when are you gonna get taller, huh? What are you, fifteen, sixteen years old? Well, all right then, you’re fine. All right, lets go. Come on, I’m a busy man. I am, after all, the President of Bulgaria. Now, wait a second. That’s not right. I’m not the President of Bulgaria. I am the President of the Great Kingdom of Luxembourg. Now hold on, I know I’m the President of something... Yes! Thank you. I am the President of the United States of America. Now, who has a question? Yes, ma’am. My favorite part about being President? I’m doing it right now.  Who’s next? All right.  Wait. Hang on a second. Okay.  Apparently, there’s a group of kids in the other room that I might like better. Yeah. Okay. Send some flowers. Then I’ll call his parents. Okay.  All right, now on with the questions. Now wait a minute, when you address me, please bear in mind that you are speaking to His Royal Majesty, The King of all England. Oh, what was it again? Yes. No. Leave me alone. Josh, what are you doing right now? Blow it off. Seriously, take an hour and come with us. Leave me alone. Oh I sneak out every now and then. Yes, couple of agents, an unmarked black suburban. They tell the manager, they clear the store, I’m in, I’m out. It’s like nothing ever happened. Did you know that there’s an underground tunnel out of here? I haven’t been able to find it even though I search almost everyday. To a place called Rare Books, you know what they sell? Funny boy. Tell her to leave me alone. Sheila! This is a Christmas thing I’m doing Mandy; we don’t have to make hay out of it.  Want to come? It’s Christmas, Josh! No reason we can’t do both. Let’s go shopping! Oooh! “The Fables of Phaedrus,” 1886, first edition, red leather label, gilt lettering, engraved frontice. Phaedrus, you know, who was a slave, but later granted his freedom by Augustus, wrote his animal fables in iambic verse. That’s what I say. So, you won’t change your mind? So you’re gonna sit around in your hotel room by yourself? Oh! So you’re gonna work on Christmas? Good, that makes me feel better. Come to Manchester, stay at the house. I wasn’t planning on doing that, but now that you suggest it. Suit yourself. Yeah? I’m not worried about it Leo. It’ll be fine, these things can go away by themselves. I don’t want to talk about an exit strategy. I really don’t. It’s gonna be fine. Yeah? All right. You know Zoey is starting Georgetown in two weeks, I was thinking about getting this for her. “The Nature of Things. A Viviscalic Poem Translated from the Latin of Titus Lucrecius Carus.” Yeah. Because it’s got brown Moroccan spine labels. All right, thanks.  Thank you all, Merry Christmas! “Life of Epicurus”, two volumes. Hello everybody. Welcome to The White House.  Joey. Welcome to the White House.  No. Deal with it.  I’ll be right back. Merry Christmas, Nancy. Hi. How you doing? Apparently I’ve arranged for an honor guard for somebody. No, no, just tell me, is there anything else I’ve arranged for? We’re still in NATO, right? What’s going on? Toby, you’re not responsible... Toby, if we start pulling strings like this, you don’t think every homeless veteran would come out of the woodworks?  When is this thing? Okay. Keep your seats.  Admiral Fitzwallace? Is it clear what India’s objective is? When you say “the Indian army,” what are we talking about? Five guys in a Humvee? What?  In the last twenty-five minutes? 300,000 is an awfully large piece of troop movement to have been on a whim. This was long planned. All I’m trying to do right now? I’m trying to avoid making eye contact with the CIA Director. 300,000 troops? I can’t move my motorcade from K Street to Connecticut without it showing up on a weather satellite. Pick it up again, would you please? Any chance this is an exercise? A threat gesture? Any nuclear activity? Oh, I wouldn’t worry about that, that’s probably not important information. All right. I’m ordering the Crisis Task Force activated, and I want you to prepare to give me a national security briefing. Thank you. I’ve already had words. TOBY, the U.N. Security Council is meeting in an emergency session to try to affect a cease-fire. We were getting to it. They didn’t exactly miss them. In fact, they’ve got a very good photo now. Yeah. Toby, how much do you know about India and Pakistan? Hello. Thanks, C.J. Is that Zoey? Bobby? Well, we’ve got ourselves a ballgame. 3:00. Okay. Thank you. Like what? Well, bring in Dr. Strangelove and we’re all set. There’s an India expert I want to bring in. You guys are gonna love him. He’s colorful. Lord John Marbury, former ambassador to New Delhi from the Court of Saint James. He’s colorful, Leo. We can hide the women. But the man deserves a drink. Let’s get him on a plane. Anything else? Yeah. This ought to be delightful. Thanks for staying late, Charlie. Sure. I’m sorry? My daughter asked you out? I should have locked her in the dungeon. I could have built one. Charlie, you have picked the absolute worst time in the world to talk to me about this. Okay. Yes.  He wants to go out with Zoey. Shut up! Mr. Ambassador. Thank you for seeing us so late, and on such short notice. Please sit down. Mr. Ambassador, it is crucial that we join together to bring about a cease-fire and then a pullback, in Kashmir, before this conflict takes another escalating step. You do. Thank you. Well, this just keeps getting better and better. Mr. Ambassador. You know Leo McGarry? Please, sit down. We’ve been trying to phone your Prime Minister without any luck. Can you help us out there? Mr. Ambassador, I stood at a podium this morning, and I publicly condemned the incursion by Indian forces. My condemnation might have been stronger if my State Department didn’t feel that the Indian action was provoked. You deny there has been Pakistani movement in the Neutral Zone? Hang on. Look. The U.S. is committed to finding a reasonable solution to the dispute. Whatever the language, I know that you will agree with me that we have to find a way for these two countries to exist together in a global community. I’d imagine the Indian ambassador is going to say roughly the same thing about you. Yes.  Thank you for coming.  Thank you. I’ll take the Indian ambassador in the Oval Office. And then if you could just ask the Secret Service to step in and kill me, please. Zoey just walked right up to him and asked him out. See, but a dungeon would have put an end to that. I think you’re trying to cover up the fact that you’re enjoying this. I’m a father in pain. Leo. A racial problem? I don’t! I don’t have a racial problem. I’m Spencer Tracy at the end of “Guess Who’s Coming to Dinner.” Racial problem! My problem is not that she’s white, he’s black, it’s that she’s a girl and he’s not. To say nothing of he’s older than she is. Yeah, but a guy learns a lot in those two years. Tracy was good in that movie. Thank you. Mr. Ambassador. I was looking a lot better before your country breached about fourteen cease-fire conditions without so much as a phone call, so let’s sit down and talk. Charlie, please close the door. My frustration, Mr. Ambassador, is that both you and the Pakistanis have nuclear weapons and a tendency to get cranky. Well, it was nice spending this time with you. Thank you. Every time he talks about colonial Western imperialism, I always want to remind him that the United States is also a revolutionary country that threw off its colonial masters. I keep forgetting. Is he here? Send him in please. John! Thank you for coming. How was your flight? We need your take on the situation, John. The world is coming apart at the seams. Yeah, go ahead. I want to ask him to stay a little bit and help us out. You two are going to become good friends. For the first couple of weeks, so did I. Hello, Margaret. Yeah. Is he still on the phone? Okay.  There’s a quote from Revelations I’m trying to remember. It’s about a horse. Why not? Say, listen. My hesitation about your going out with Zoey before, you know, it’s not ‘cause you’re black. It’s not. It is. Still, I want you to go out with her if that’s what you both want to do. That’s fine. Just remember these two things: She’s nineteen years old, and the 82nd Airborne works for me. Also this - no kidding. You go out with Zoey, you’re gonna get your picture taken. There’s gonna be a lot of people not wild about the sight of you and the President’s daughter. You know what to do with the mail, right?  All right. You keep your head up. Should have built a dungeon.  Revelations. It’s about a horse, and Death was riding on it maybe. Okay. Yes, please. Thank you, Charlie. Ah, good, I want you all to meet John. Lord Marbury. How you doing? Don’t you ever forget the battles you’ve fought and won. That’s what I’d heard. But all they got was two weeks. John, I was hoping you’d stick around for a couple of days and help us out. John, there’s a quote from Revelations... Are you frightened, John? Yes. Good. With nearly 18 million new jobs, wages rising at more than twice the rate of inflation, the highest home ownership in history, the smallest welfare rolls in 30 years and the lowest peacetime unemployment since 1957.  I stand before you to report that America has created the longest peacetime economic expansion in our history. For the first time in three decades, the budget is balanced. From a deficit of 290 million dollars just ten years ago... What? What’d I say? I said million?  From a deficit of 290 billion dollars, just ten... it says “million” on the TelePrompTer, by the way. L-Let’s take it back. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Vice President... Members of the 106th Congress, distinguished guests... ...And how do we make the American dream of opportunity a reality for all? I came to this hallowed chamber one year ago, and I see we’re spelling “hallowed” with a pound sign in the middle of it. The pound sign’s silent? I came to this hallowed chamber one year ago on a mission: to restore the American dream for all our people, as we gaze at the vast horizon of possibilities open to us in the 321st century... Wow, that was ambitious of me, wasn’t it? We meant “stronger” here, right? I’m proud to report our country’s stranger than it was a year ago? Could go either way. Yes, sir. Why is everyone asking me that today? I’m fine. I’m fine. I’m taking many things, C.J. I don’t know. My wife hands me pills. I swallow them with water. Vitamin C. Vitamin B. Is it possible I’m taking something called 'euthanasia'? Ah, that sounds more like it... Toby? I’m taking pills, C.J.  You know, carrying them around in my pocket was a pretty big step for me. Toby? “How do we make the American dream a reality for all who work for it.” You got to add, “who work for it.” It’s what they’re listening for in welfare reforms, so screw it. Damn, Toby, ‘cause you’re exactly who I was gonna come running to. Well, I’m gazing in the 321st century, man. There’s a lot on my mind. Oh, dear God. I will take the pills, C.J. Yes. I will go to the Oval Office, and pour a glass of water from the Steuben glass pitcher, which was a gift from the Christian Charity Network there, Skippy. I’m just saying, before you start calling me, Ebenezer Bartlet, remember, I got a really nice glass pitcher for just, you know, being a good guy.  I will take the pills. I don’t need a cardiogram. I got dizzy. I didn’t have a heart attack, Leo. I got the flu, and I don’t need a cardiogram. Leo, I’m fine. Thank you, Mrs. Landingham... Mrs. Landingham how do I look to you?  See? Can’t yet. Situation Room.  Just a little joke. 101.9 and I still got it. Anybody know if the Celtics won tonight? It was a two-week cease-fire. There’s four days left. What’s Intel saying about the Pakistanis? They’ve got mine. I’m going to bed. But somebody call me if there’s movement. Yeah? Ugh. Good night.  It tested very well. I’m not saying we’re doing it, Toby. I just want to try it and see how it reads. The era of big government is over... All right. Thanks. I’m feeling roughly the same as I was feeling when you asked me four minutes ago. It’s okay. This isn’t the worst of it, Charlie. The worst of it’s coming up the stairs right now. Hello. Abbey? I was wondering when you were gonna notice me. No. You’re very sexy when you’re in doctor mode you know that? Give me an IV/saline solution and 100 milligrams of Flumadine. Stat.  I could jump you right now. My thing’s more fun. Fitzwallace called me in the Situation Room. There was more movement in Kashmir. Abbey? I broke the Steuben glass pitcher in the Oval Office. Seriously, Abbey, I’m fine.  But I didn’t. Yeah. I really don’t remember. Fitzwallace says the Pakistanis are giving command control to some nuclear weapons to the field. I’m really sorry about the pitcher. I could jump you right now. Can I go to the office? Why not? Why? Here’s the thing though. I never really saw you study while you were in med school. Do you even know what you’re listening for right now?   How many? I’m going to the office. Really? Okay. Uh-oh. Alright. I think I’ll stay here for a little bit. I don’t understand. Don’t any of these characters have jobs? They seem to have a lot of free time in the middle of the day. And that woman’s changed her clothes for quite a lot in one afternoon. Yeah. Would you mind stepping out, Charlie? Abbey phoned me up and told me about your conversation. I was diagnosed about seven years ago. My life expectancy is normal. My particular course of MS is relapsing-remitting, which means I should experience total recovery after attacks. Abbey gives me injections of something called Betaseron, and that reduces the frequency. Fever and stress tend to be two things that induces attacks. 101.9. You haven’t called me “Jed” since I was elected. ‘Cause I wanted to be the President. You’ve been a friend. I know. When you stood up there today, I was so proud. I wanted to be with you. I tried to get up, but I fell back down again.  I’m so sorry, Leo. I really am. Yeah, Charlie? Yeah, give us a minute, would you please? And a strong shot of whiskey? What have you got for me, John? Buy them? How? John, please. What does India want? Your friend, the prime minister? He’s gonna go for this? All right, you tell the ambassador we’ll discuss this in three months. In three months, John. I don’t want this to be like quid pro quo. That’s the carrot. Leo, what’s the stick? They put command-control in the field, John, and we’re gonna get physical. You make damn sure they know that. Talk to the ambassador. I want Fitzwallace to have photos in 24 hours. Yes, Charlie? Toby, come in please. Let’s hope. Much better. Thank you. You know, I was watching a television program before with a sort of a roving moderator who spoke to a seated panel of young women who are having some sort of problems with their boyfriends. Apparently, because the boyfriends have all slept with the girlfriend’s mothers. Then they brought all the boyfriends out and they fought right there on television. Toby, tell me, these people don’t vote, do they? What do you need, Josh?  What’s on your mind? You want to cut the line? I think so, too.  What do you think, Josh? Then you and Sam get your people together and get to work. Thank you. Abbey...? You’ve taken it 14 times in the last three hours. You’re not taking it again. At least not with a thermometer. I’m saying if you want to take it recreationally... Yes, I do. I stopped asking those questions. Good evening. Thank you, John. Godspeed, your Lordship. Friends, let me have your attention please. A lot of time, energy, passion, wit, skill, and talent went into drafting this, and while you might not know it from my delivery later, this is an extraordinary speech. And I say thee yea! Toby Ziegler, and I say thee yea! Sam Seaborn! Roger. Roger, I’m sorry you drew the short straw on this. We’ll miss you tonight. Next year, it’ll be the surgeon general, I promise. Meanwhile, you can watch TV at my study. Oh, thank you. What is it? This is magnificent.  “He shall, from time to time, give to the Congress information on the state of the union and recommend to their consideration such measures as he shall judge necessary and expedient.” Thank you, Roger. Oh, Roger, if anything happened, you know what to do, right? First thing always is national security. Get your commanders together. Appoint joint chiefs. Appoint chairman. Take them to Defcon 4. Have the governor send emergency delegates to Washington. The assistant attorney general is gonna be the acting A.G. If he tells you he wants to bring out the National Guard, do what he tells you. You have a best friend? Is he smarter than you? Would you trust him with your life? That’s your chief of staff. Oh, in the residence, in the second floor, the bathroom at the end of the hall. You have to jiggle the handle a little. I got to go.  You’ll do fine. People have phenomenal capacity. I don't want to spend the whole day talking about bananas. Good morning Nancy, good morning Mrs. Landingham. No. I really don't want a banana. Yes, thank you. I'm done talking to you now. Good Morning everyone. Sit down, sit down please. Are we a poor Latin American country? Then why am I having this conversation? I'm in trouble with Chiquita and Dole? Toby. We have appointed five people to the Corporation for Public Broadcasting. Republicans in the House, as well as an alarming number of Democrats, have been holding up those appointments. As far as I can tell, their reluctance has little, if anything, to do with bananas. You're all set? You're going to sit with them? And talk to the father. The mother too, but I'm concerned about the father. This is no time to out a guy in front and center who's embarrassed that his son was gay. Sit and talk to them. I haven't had chance yet. Give me a chance to look it over and we'll talk at the end of the day. Josh and Sam, wait up a second. Leo, don't go away.  Excuse us a second. Thank you.  What time are you going up to the Hill? I want to pre-empt a hearing. I don't want it. I don't want it for Leo. I don't want it for his family. I don't want it for us. They know that, and they're gonna play "Let's Make a Deal." Don't take anything off the table until you've talked to me. You understand? Okay. Unless a war breaks out, I'll be spending much of my day talking about bananas. Thank you. Alright.  Is Simon Blye coming in to meet with you today? I broke into your secret schedule compartment and took infrared photos with my compact camera.  Margaret told me. Look, why are you meeting with that man? No, he's not. In good times, Leo. It's not hard to like a guy when he's doing well. The measure of a man is, how does he behave when things are otherwise? That you couldn't get from me? Or Toby, or Josh, or Sam, or C.J.? I know you... You put a lot of faith in people, Leo, and I love you for that. I just don't want to see you get disappointed. Especially now. Okay. I will. Thank you. "The majority of young people move from kissing to more intimate sexual behaviors during their teenage years. More than 50 percent engage in petting behavior.''  That's what I think it is, right? "By the age of 14, more than 25 percent have touched a girl's..." I won't say that word.   Yes? Go. Thank you. With you? No. Because I'd rather not be in therapy for the rest of my life.  Mrs. Landingham. You're not going to believe this but I think I'd actually like a banana. Why not? I wasn't snippy! Thank you, Mrs. Landingham. She withholds food from me. The sex-ed report. We're gonna leave it alone for a while.  After the midterm elections. Yeah. It's a pretty incendiary report.  It's not gonna play well at a PTA meeting, C.J. It says we should be teaching kids to have sex. Of course it doesn't. But that's how it's going to play.  C.J. C.J., getting it through this congress, a body which at the moment, will only give federal funding to sex education programs that teach abstinence only.  And we will avail ourselves of that pulpit but we will do it after the midterm elections. I needed to get Leo off the hook, C.J. Yes. We'll deal with it after the midterm elections.  I was hoping you would. Yeah. Well there's nothing wrong with telling them we got it. I wouldn't make a big deal out of it. We got it, we're looking at it, we're studying it. Throw it out with the trash. Thanks, C.J. I know. C.J., look... I was helping pass the time. I was being entertaining as well as instructive. Leo! What’re you doing here? Great! Aww. You don’t know how to have fun when we’re traveling... We got to get Mendoza on the bench. Why is it my problem at all? The governor of Michigan. Yeah. Which allows for the death penalty in certain drug related homicides. How long? Okay, I’ll wait for that then. I’m gonna want to see our people over the next few days. I’m not going to be very good at this, Leo. Yeah.  Charlie! Thank you. Charlie, there’s a priest in Hanover. His name is Thomas Cavanaugh. He’s at the Immaculate Heart of Mary. I’d like to arrange to have him come down and spend some time with me this weekend. Very important that the White House not pay for this. This is my nickel. And I’m gonna want to...  No. No, never mind.  Yeah. I’m gonna want to talk to the Pope. Charlie.  I’m gonna ask you a question. And this is one of those times that it’s okay to tell me I’ve stepped over the line, and I should shut my mouth, okay. What happened to the guy who shot your mother? If they did, would you wanna see him executed? Killing a police officer’s a capital crime. I figured you must have thought about it. And?  Yeah. Thank you, Charlie.  Hey, Josh. How are you? Who are your friends?  How are you? Thank you. Hi, Kenny. I was just wandering the halls and thinking.  You ever seen the White House? Let’s take a walk. Come on. Do you read lips? Joey? Is that short for Joanne? And your last name is Lucas? Is that Polish? Protestant? Well, this is the Oval Office. Come in, please. Sit down. Well, where did you go to school? There’s a guy named Simon Cruz on death row. He’s going to be executed in about 36 hours. What do you think I should do? Why? He was found guilty of a double murder and drug trafficking. You’re against capital punishment. Did you study St. Augustine at Stanford? Thomas Aquinas? Two pretty smart guys, right? They believed in that part of the Old Testament which said, “Who sheddeth a man’s blood by man shall his blood be shed.” I’ve got a Harris poll says seventy-one percent of the American people support capital punishment. I’m a politician. In the California forty-sixth? O’Dwyer’s an empty shirt. I don’t like guys who run for congress because they think it’s a great gig. Find yourself a live one and I’ll get interested. In the meantime, the devil you know beats the devil you don’t. And I like the devil I got. Josh will take care of you from here. Okay. Thank you. Fine. What do you need? Jewish law doesn’t prohibit... The commandment does not say, “Thou shalt not kill.” It says, “Thou shalt not murder.” We make it very hard to kill anybody in this country, Toby. But it’s not. Hey. Toby went to Shul. Yeah. I commute this guy, for no particular reason other than I don’t like the death penalty... And the next President sees it in a different way. I’ve laid track to all kinds of... The next guy is gonna have eighth amendment problems up the ass. We cannot execute some people and not execute others depending on the mood of the Oval Office. It’s cruel and unusual. Okay. Give me a minute please, Nancy.  Thank you. Yeah. Thank you. Tom. Thank you, Charlie. Thanks for coming all this way down. Yeah, it seems like a wasted trip. This is it. You’re looking at the room. We don’t use the red phone anymore. I tell Mrs. Landingham I want to talk to the Kremlin. Would you like a drink? To be honest, I prefer Mr. President. You understand why, right? It’s not ego. There are certain decisions I have to make while I’m in this room. Do I send troops into harm’s way? Which fatal disease gets the most research money? It’s helpful in those situations not to think of yourself as the man but as the office. I want you to know that I had a number of people on my staff search for a reason the public would find palatable to commute the sentence. A technicality. Any evidence of racism. Yeah. I’m the leader of a democracy, Tom. Seventy-one percent of the people support capital punishment. People have spoken. The courts have spoken. Yeah.  Oh, for crying out loud, Tom. I open my mouth and say, “Somebody get me the Pope.” Anyway. I looked for a way out, I really did. I know. I know. I did, Tom. I know it’s hard to believe, but I prayed for wisdom.  It never has. And I’m a little pissed off about that.  I’m not kidding. Yes, please. Bless me, Father, for I have sinned... “If the shoe fits!”  “When reporters confronted Secretary O’Leary in a hallway outside the hearing room, she defended...” Oh come on! Leo! Yeah.  “If the shoe fits.” Is that the best she could do? Let me say that I have great confidence in Deborah O’Leary. She’s done a terrific job at HUD, helping thousands of people make the very difficult transition from joblessness and homelessness to more fulfilling and productive lives. I was hoping you weren’t going to notice that, Danny. Then I will tell you that I agree the Republican Party does not have a comprehensive program for combating poverty in this country. That being said, there are countless Republicans who are working very hard to change their party’s legacy on some of these issues. And I hope to be working with them to do just that. Frankly, I think she went too far in assigning motive to Congressman Wooden and the Republican Party. She’ll be meeting with Leo McGarry. An apology’d be appropriate.  That went pretty well. What? What could you possibly want right now? In the morning? I mean, what in the name of everything holy could you want right now? Who the hell is this? And what could you possibly want? All right. I’ll get up now.   Charlie, are you aware you’re committing a federal crime right now? How did you know the First Lady wasn’t going to be naked when you came in here?  Come to think of it, where the hell is my wife? That’s right.  Have you slept yet? Good. I’m tired, I’m cranky, and my wife’s in Argentina. Let’s get this over with. What? What kind of incidents? Who did? Oh God. I have a secret plan to fight inflation? Why am I gonna be reading that I do? By who? You told the press I have a secret plan to fight inflation? Josh, I’m a little confused. Okay, before we go on. C.J., if blood is gushing from the head wound you just received from a stampeding herd of bison, you’ll do the press briefing. A secret plan to fight inflation? Were you clear? Are you telling me that not only did you invent a secret plan to fight inflation, but now you don’t support it? What did Mendoza do? I didn’t, he did.  You said you were gonna fix it. It’s broken again, Leo. We will have the first of what I think will a series of discussions about professionalism another time, Toby. Where is Mendoza? Right now? Day after tomorrow? Is he coming in from Neptune? Okay. We will wait for Mendoza. In the meantime, C.J., you will untangle the Press Corps. And we will hope that nothing happens today to make this any worse. Although I certainly wouldn’t bet the house on it. That is all. Good. Get out. Bartlet and Leo are inside the limousine. It’s headed for the airport. I don't like putting him in this position. I just don't want you to think that I'm getting any pleasure in putting him in this position. It's ironic. I mean it's ironic that it all comes down to a vote on the ethanol tax credit. 50-50 tie. Are you being brusque with me? I'm just saying you can't blame me. It's what you get from having an even number of senators. That's what I usually do.  Ron, am I going to meet her on the plane?  Zoey got a new agent on her detail. Have you seen these new agents? They've got the hair, the backpacks, the clothes. Walking around campus strapped to a 44 magnum. Let me tell you something, when it's your kid, you don't want them blending in. You want them wearing a sign that says, "I'm carrying a loaded gun, and the safety's off." No. Leo. I won't get tired. I want to come home after the fundraiser. It'll be fine. Your impersonation of my mother is getting sharper and sharper, you know that? I'll see you tomorrow. C.J.! Charlie! My flying companions! Is everybody on board? Press in a good mood? Why not? Oh, it's going to be great. We're going to race the sun to the pacific horizon! Morning, Everyone. Sam, it's going to be 50-50 on the ethanol tax credit. Make all the calls you want, it's going to be 50-50. You two are so freaked out about this Al Kiefer meeting. We'll listen to him, Josh. You two want to see the best part about having my job?  Colonel, this is the president. I'm ready to go. Come on in.  How do you do? Thank you, Ron.  I'm sorry we haven't had a chance to meet before now. You've been with Zoey's detail, what? You were in the army? How did you get there? Where? You were a Mountaineer. With a degree in? So, you were commissioned a second lieutenant? How old are you? How long have you trained for this assignment? What, were you the first one to sign up? All right. You know Zoey's dating my body man, Charlie Young, right? You know about the letters? Are they white supremacists? You don't have an artist's sketch, or psychological profiles, or anything? It is. Okay. Zoey's 19 and she wants to be a teenager. She wants a college experience, and I can't blame her. I loved college. So did my other daughters. I want Zoey to be comfortable with her protection, I don't want her to try and give you the slip. It's not your job to tell me she wants to cut English Lit, it's not your job to tell me if she's dying her hair blue, or going to a strip club, or whatever it is she's doing with her friends. You know what your job is. Thank you. Gina? If she's cutting English Lit, I want to know about it. Okay. I'm sorry. I've actually been told that I have to go now. This is a debate that is obviously going to continue in town halls, city halls, state legislatures, and the U.S. House of Representatives. There is a population in this country that seems to focus so much time and energy into this conversation, so much so that I am forced to ask this question -- is there an epidemic of flag burning going on that I'm not aware of? I mean it, man, is there an emergency-level outbreak of flag desecration no one's kept me posted on? Toby, there is no reason for you to feel threatened by Al Kiefer. Excellent. Because we're doing it over lunch. Back at the Hotel. Better, yet, Charlie, where is Zoey having lunch? Why? That supposed to be a good place, Sam? Is that an L.A. experience? Well, there aren't going to be any people today. Sounds like fun, doesn't it? Yeah, but the hotel wouldn't make the guacamole right in front of me. We can do it in the car. Who's talking to Leo? You come in the car, too. cheering people holding signs.  Those people over there don't like me too much. You would honestly think there was an epidemic of flag burning going on, endangering countless lives in this country. I'm having lunch with my daughter, Toby. You guys are going to sit with Kiefer, and let me know what's worth listening to.  We'll see you there. No, and you know why? Because you made fun of the guacamole. I could tell you were thinking it. Good. Surprised you for lunch, I know, I'm the best. You are. Yeah, but on the other hand, the guy made guacamole right in front of us. This is father/daughter fun time. Oh, you know, I hadn't thought about that.  Now that you mention it, yeah, I think you're right. All kinds of things in California, Zoey. You've got your smog, your freeway shootings, brush fires, mudslides. Plus, apparently, there's a mad rash of flag burning going on, and you don't want a piece of that. Right there, right in front of me, they made the guacamole. Now, how about that? C.J., has Al said something that I should listen to, yet? What do you got? What do you got, Al? Yeah, but I never get tired of hearing them, you know. Especially in front of my daughter. Yeah, Charlie.  Yeah. Men with pools and patios think I'm weak. Was that Marcus on the phone? No way I can get out of it? I used to like parties, you know that? We're running out of reasons not to fire him, Leo. I can ask for his resignation, and don't be a smart ass. What? About what? Sam's weighing in. All right, let's do what Sam said. I'm not done with Hoynes, but dump it. I'll call him from the plane.  Christ, will this damn day never end? It's not going to pass, Ted. It's not going to get voted on. And I'm saying as a gesture, as a symbol, you make that public demand, Ted, and you're going to be Cameron's best friend. Oh, God, Ted! Give me the name of one person who's complaining to you, and I'll call them personally and tell them I will never sign a law like that. Ted.  Don't you ever slap Josh Lyman around again. That guy is the White House Deputy Chief of Staff. He's not one of your associate producers. Don't screw around with me now, Ted. I'm really not in the mood. Right now, right this second, the worst thing that could possibly happen to gay rights in this country is for me to put that thing on the debating table, which is happens the minute I open my mouth. Do you get that? I'm a human starting gun, Ted. You got to trust me! I know what I'm doing. Do you? Thank you. No. Imagine how tired I'm going to look when you see me a couple of months from now.  I haven't slept well, lately. Kept everyone up on the plane as we flew out. You know, we left at 3 in the morning? I really want to try to sleep on the way back.  Anyway, Mr. Vice President, it's taken care of, we can put it to rest. You're welcome. Bye. Wait. John? I want to tell you, a couple of years ago in Iowa, I really admired the way you hung in there on the ethanol tax credit. You went out to Iowa and said the same things you'd been saying in the Senate for eight years, event though you knew it wasn't going to play. My confession is, you and I agree on ethanol, but you were the only one to say it. You stood in there even though you knew you were going to lose Iowa and who knows what after that. Anyway, I just wanted to say you had a good day today, John. I'm going to try to go to sleep now. Yeah.  Is here going to be a coup? Is there going to be a coup? And this is on page.... Page 17. Yeah?  Leo... Intelligence briefing. There are mornings I'm just nodding my head. That can't be good for anybody. No!  He died?!? I'll say. Who knows so far? Dammit.  The market is going to open 200 points down. When was the last time we were lucky? It's going to be 300...350. Not yet. Not... yet. I'm not saying I'm not sure it's Ehrlich. I'm saying I'm not sure. It's the Fed Chairman. Give me a day. How expensive. Wall Street needs to trust me. A day. I'll tell you something else. You could have been nicer to me during this conversation. By saying that Wall Street does trust me and the market will hold until I appoint a new Fed Chairman. I'm taking the day. No. I'm not ready to jump into bed with Ron Ehrlich yet. I'm one of the few people in my family who can say that. So...  That's was page 17? Without regard to the validity of past arguments. Yes and I'm saying that condition doesn't exist anymore. Historically, American prosperity has been built the broad growth in the GDP of 5% of greater. And now with the deflationary pressures of the Global Economy, that kind of growth can be achieved without the negative side affects of rampant inflation.  Do you understand what I'm saying? My point is Ron Ehrlich might not be the guy. I'm saying it's not a mortal lock.  No... No, no...  Noooo... C.J., we don't handle my wife. When we try, do you know what happens at the other end of this building?  I get a little punishment. Screw it. Let's move on. It's not a big deal.   Can I do that? Yeah, Leo says I can do that. It's gonna be Phyllis who has never liked me. It's gonna be Susan who thinks I'm xenophobic because I don't like Mexican food. These are my wife's friends. Yes.  They're still angry at me 'cause I accidentally ran them over with my car. Thank you, Mrs. Landingham. No. Thank you, C.J. I'll tell you what else; historically 2 to 2 ½ GDP expansion is classified lack luster even anemic economic growth.  Four ½ to 5% is needed just to be considered robust and not even spectacular. Sometimes I'm just making it up. Hello, sweetheart.  Who the hell knows?  No. Thank you, Leo. What you got today? How about math. Why aren't you taking math? Wiseass all you want, but you're coming of age in the 21st century. A century in which I promise you mathematics is going to play a starring role. On the other hand I would definitely put my shoulder into Intro to Cinema. Intro to Cinema's what got me where I am today. That was going to be a big part of my day.  I met with Butterfield and some Secret Service Agents this morning. You didn't do anything. They think you should be taking more math. It's time for me to tell you about some letters we've been getting.  Yeah. They don't like that the daughter of the President is dating a young black man. Zoey, please don't tell me you're dating more than one guy. Ok. Cause one guy for you is actually one more than I'm comfortable with. I could see it's had a real impact on you. No worse than any of the stuff they intercept. Yeah. Why did Butterfield and the guys meet with me? Apparently there's National Convention of some sort in Virginia. It was in the papers yesterday that you and Charlie are going to some club opening this weekend. You don't have to cancel, but you can't bring Charlie. You want me to tell him? You gotta tell him he truth Zoey. Don't make something up. You sure you don't want me to come? Okay. Yeah? Okay.  You gotta go. I never really new him that well. I don't know. You want the job? Can't have it. Know why? Not enough math. Bye. Danny... Please.  Yes.  We note with surprise your lack of conviction, Leo. I miss our late night talks, Danny.  Out there in the campaign trail.... Ames, Iowa...Tulsa... Skokie, Center City, Tallahassee, Albany...San Antonio, Jasper, Wyoming.  We got very close. You covered the First Lady as well. You literally wrote the book on my wife. Once again I want to emphasize the strong personal bond we built on the campaign...  ...in a... proper... gentlemanly... ...way...  Danny. You must save me from having this conversation with my wife. Or at least make it seem like I'm better armed than I evidently am.  Danny... We're off the record. Welcome to the club, Danny. We had some jackets made.  I'm not kidding...a personal bond here, Danny.  You're coaching my Personal Aide on how to best score with my daughter? Yes, Danny, that does make me feel better. Go away. The rhythm of the sewing machine petals? Stay. Chicken. Hello. Abbey?  Well, your Chief of Staff is a very attractive woman. Maybe he was, you know... Abbey, I told C.J. specifically...  No, she didn't. She didn't get the signal wrong. I wanted her to send someone. This wire thing is a problem for me. The kid on TV was a mistake. And the amendment, from Becky Reeseman... ...will bring down a trade bill that's been worked on for years.  Fine. I staffed it out to C.J.. That's right.  Then don't play me, Abbey! Don't work me! A lot of people around here think it was Lilly Mays, who planted you have a preference for Ron Erlich!  I know it wasn't Lilly Mays. It was you!  Yes!  Well you put me in a bit of a spot there, Abigail. I name Ron Erlich now, which I was going to do anyway, and it makes me look like I'm taking instructions from my wife! Are you talking about you or me?  I'll walk up to the hill right now, and I will give the Speaker of the House my resignation.  Do you want to see me get on the phone and put it in session?!  It was nine months, Abbey. Not six months. And I waited a day on Skippy, because the fed chair is a fairly important position, and I wanted to make damn sure my decision was right. How the hell do you know? Yes. Yes. On that point I concede the high ground. Good. No, no however. Just be wrong. Just stand there in your wrongness and be wrong, and get used to it. Nine months, Abbey. Yes? Abbey, please.  Yeah. Okay.  We just had our first Oval Office fight. Did you talk to Zoey today?  Maybe she'll be so traumatized by this experience, that she'll never date another boy again. Don't finish that sentence, I'm a man of questionable health.  The Michigan women are waiting for me. Charlie. I heard. It's the first time anyone's canceled lunch on me since I took office. I'm not saying he didn't have a good excuse. Rules of Civility and Decent Behavior in Company and Conversation by George Washington. The rules were drawn from an English translation of a French book of maxims. Washington copied them down when he was 14 years old.  "When you sit down, keep your feet firm and even, without putting one on the other or crossing them. Put not off your clothes in the presence of others, nor go out of your chamber half-dressed." What a tightassed little priss he must've been.  Do you think I could take George Washington? I don't know... a war? Yeah. The Minutemen were good. Yeah.  You can send her in. C.J.  "When in company, put not your hands on any part of your body not usually covered." Yeah, you're right. What's going on? What is going on? What are you talking about? Why did she lie? Then why did she? She never has to. Apparently she doesn't.  A reporter talked to her on campus? C.J.!  Put the press in the briefing room. Tell them I'm coming right over. C.J.... We have been over this and we have been over this and we have been over this! They are not supposed to talk to my daughter on campus. I don't give a damn if it was the Bergen County Shopper's Guide. I want to talk to the press. Watch me. So I just sit in my office and fume? Fine. What? Excellent. I haven't heard anything about it. I could take George Washington, by the way. Anything else? Thank you, C.J. TELEPLAY BY: AARON SORKIN STORY BY: PETER PARNELL & PATRICK CADDELL DIRECTED BY: LAURA INNES Can we get this Godforsaken event over with so I can get back to presiding over a civilization gone to hell in a handcart? Leave me alone. What what is? There’s nothing wrong with my mood. Would you get off me with that? I know I’d like to beat you senseless with a head of cabbage. I know that for damn sure. Charlie, does anyone have my remarks? Is Toby on his way? C.J.? Why aren’t they here right now? Nothing like surrounding yourself with the best and the brightest, Charlie. Hello. You didn’t know it was raining? Okay. A couple of things, uh, who am I gonna be talking to now? No, seriously now. Give me the damn speech. Have I ever been trout fishing? Okay. What’s going on Josh? Hang on. Two F.E.C. commissioners resigned? There are two seats open in the F.E.C.? This is interesting. Leo, two seats just opened up in the Federal Election Commission. I’m saying, what if this time we say we want our guys? Yeah, but we can dangle our feet in the water. Josh- I’m talking about dangling our feet in the water. Josh, get Leo two candidates who back aggressive campaign finance reform. I’m not saying jump off the boat, Josh. I’m saying dangle our feet. Yes. Somebody? Thank you. No, I’m definitely gonna be thinking about the trout fishermen, Leo, ‘cause that’s where my focus should be. I was in a better mood a year ago, Leo. C.J., are you taller than you usually are? Couldn’t pick a trout out of a police lineup, by the way. Thank you. Thank you very much. It’s good to see you. Thank you. As I look out over this magnificent vista... Who’s got this? Why am I just finding out about this now? I really did wake up energized this morning. I never go to bed that way. Just once, in this job, I’d like to end a day feeling as good as I did when the day started.  Are you bothered by this? Yeah. We’ve heard it all before, Leo. You drive me to political safe ground. It’s not true. Good.   What the hell did you say? Leo? You’re wrong. You want to do this now? You came to my house, Leo. You came to my house, and you said, “Jed, let’s run for President.” I said, “Why?” And you said, “So that you can open your mouth and say what you think!” Where’d that part go, Leo? Look... This morning- Did I not say put our guys on the F.E.C.? Leo! You’re writing a fascinating version of history, my friend. You brought me in on teachers. You brought me in on capital gains. You brought me in on China. And you brought me in on guns. That’s crap. Leo, if I ever told you to get aggressive about campaign finance or gays in the military, you would tell me, “Don’t run too fast or go to far.” I have said it, and nothing’s every happened! I don’t want to feel like this anymore. I don’t want to go to sleep like this. I want to speak. This is more important than reelection. I want to speak now. This is more important than reelection. I want to speak now. What’s happening? Yes! This is more important than reelection. I want to speak now. You have a strategy for all this? What is it? The President looks at it and back to Leo as his chief of staff goes back into-- LEO’S OFFICE. The staff are still inside. Leo takes off his jacket and leans on his desk. I get nervous around laws that fundamentally assume that Americans can't be trusted. We’d better have mandatory sentencing, because judges can't be trusted to disperse even-handed justice. We better have term limits, ‘cause voters can't be trusted to recognize corruption. Oh, and by the way... I say, by the way. When the playing field is leveled and the process is fair and open, it turns out we have term limits. They're called elections. My father was very fond of the analogy of the Irish lads whose journey was blocked by a brick wall, seemingly too high to scale. Throwing their caps over the wall, the lads had no choice but to follow. How many times in the great history of our country have we come to a wall seemingly too high to scale only to throw our caps to the other side?  Tomorrow... tomorrow morning, we're going to begin to change the way elections are supervised in this country.  I am proud to nominate John Branford Bacon and Patricia Calhoun to the Federal Election Commission. Al... We don't care do we, Sam? Kiefer's been here 45 minutes, he's already got me on the playground at recess. Let's hear 'em. Toby was just explaining to Al that science is science to everyone. Go. Can't sell science? I'm hungry and so far nobody has convinced me of anything.  Yeah. Yeah. Well, yeah, that's cause I answered the phone.  What's on your mind?  Yeah, I got to be up in four hours, anyway. About what? Well, I wasn't listening to a lot of it. Leo, if there's anyone qualified to talk about the benefits of treatment vs. criminal action, it's you. Is there anyone whose life would be better right now, if you'd had gone to jail instead of rehab? Thank you. Is there anything else? Apparently there is. Yeah. I am. You fixed it this afternoon, right? Then let's move on. No need to apologize, but I accept your apology and now I'm ready, if not eager, to move on. How you doin’? Not for a little while now. Not tonight. Guys, let me tell you what I would like to have happen, right now. Josh walking in the door wasn't even close. I'm fine, thanks. How you doing? See, the part I don't understand is, I got like, 24 armed guards right outside my bedroom door... I'm a day closer. There'll be more meetings tomorrow. In the meantime, everybody calm down. Leo’s got your engines fired like you're running Daytona. That's fine. Keep them there. Guess what? Mistakes are gonna be made. Minimize them, fix them, move on. Kiefer's numbers got you scared? Listen to me. I have never lost an election in my life. We do this right, people are going to respond. You all had a good day. You guys should feel free to do this when my wife is here. Everybody. Mandy was doing her job. It's time to let her out of the doghouse.  She was doing her job. C.J.? So was Danny. Good night. We were almost done. When you were married to her, did you call her Congresswoman Wyatt? Sometimes I call my wife, Dr. Bartlet. Okay. You're whupped, my friend. No, she's been talking to your for a year about Mandatory Minimums. You've been saying no. Looks like we know who wears the pants in the Ziegler family. Just for the turn-on. Andy. Yes. Yes, they are. And it will be. Good night.  When I sleep, I dream about a great discussion with experts and ideas and diction and energy and honesty. And when I wake up, I think, "I can sell that." Good night. Not at all, we’re just having a nightcap. Oh, may I present Treasury Secretary, Kenneth... Mr. Attorney General. Our CIA Director, Rob Conrad. Barry, I’m Jed Bartlet. I understand you’re thinking about helping us out. It makes me so happy.  Well, let’s get him a drink. Leo...  This could all be for nothing. I mean, if the numbers...  Did we start? All right. Did the guys make any predictions? Yes, you did. It could be worse. I mean it could be worse than holding at 42. ‘Cause if these numbers keep going down, I’m just a guy with Barry Haskell in his office. A dress Marine guarding your door? Nah... My thing is, what’s he suppose to be guarding right now? Thanks. Based on what? Based on what is he making that claim? We’ve been out there for three weeks. Good morning, Charlie. We’ve been... we’ve been out there for three weeks. Crossfire, Meet the Press, Charlie Rose, The Today Show, The Tonight Show, Good Morning Scottsdale... ...Time, Newsweek, Popular Mechanics. We’ve been out there saying we’re not talking about legalization. We are talking about treatment. Well, how do you want to handle it? I don’t know. It sounds like we’re soft on the issue. Steve Onorato is saying I want to legalize drugs. Hmmm... Leo was in here last night. He said you guys predicted we’d hold steady at 42. Were you just being optimistic or you really think we held our ground. Sorry? Yeah? Well, okay. Anybody want to offer C.J. the odds?  Talk to the press. Tell them every administration for the past thirty years has generated that memo. That’s it.  What do you got?  It is a country. You know where? It’s actually 607 small islands in the South Pacific. Interestingly, while its total land mass is only 270 square miles, it occupies more than a million square miles of the Pacific Ocean. Population is 127,000 and the U.S. Embassy is located in the state of Pohnpei and not, as many people believe, on the island of Yap. Parties. I looked at the Federated States of Micronesia. I can’t fire our ambassador. Somebody’s going to ask me why I fired him and I’m not gonna be able to come up with the answer they’re looking for. How? To what? And what happens to the ambassador of Paraguay? Hey, I like this. Of course, if everybody keeps moving up one, then I get to go home. That ambassador is Ken Cochran, isn’t it? He’s having an affair with the daughter of the Bulgarian Prime Minister? I can imagine. Prime Minister of Bulgaria? I know his wife. I got to fire Ken Cochran? All right, then I don’t want it to be because of the girl. I know his wife. Well, it looks to me like there are legitimate grounds for incompetence, but... come up with different ones, would you? All right, let’s do it. Charlie! I need to meet with Ambassador Cochran. He can be found in his office at the U.S Embassy in Bulgaria, or not. Either way, I’d like the State Department to put his ass on a plane and have it in this office tomorrow. Thank you. Yeah. What? It looked like when I said "Ken Cochran", that you knew who he was. Okay. You never paid this girl to have sex? Well, that makes two of us. Laurie’s the girl? Toby, are you in here sticking up for Sam?  Sam, you’re going to spend the morning in the White House Counsel’s office finding out if you’ve broke any laws. You should also call the girl... what’s her name? You should call her and tell her the White House deeply regrets the phenomenal inconvenience she’s about to experience. You might also want to point out to her that she probably has a cause of action against the paper. And you should tell her that if she passes her Bar exam, the U.S. Attorney General will personally see to it that she’s admitted to the Bar. Tell her the President of the United States says congratulations on getting her degree. That’s all. It’s nice when we can do something for prostitutes once in a while, isn’t it? Are we ready to go? Where are we putting Lobell and his people? He’s going to have a lot of staff with him. I don’t know what any of them do, but there they are where ever Lobell goes, 14-15 guys.... I’m going to take care of this first and I’ll see you across the hall. Who’s in the Mural room? You did it again. When you said the name ‘Cochran’, it was like you knew him. I have a sense about these things. A finely honed sense. Cochran’s in the Mural room? Why don’t you go sit with him and send in Ted Mitchell. Thank you. Yes, of course.  Thank you. Ted. Thank you for coming. You’re looking good. How is Mary? All right, listen. I have something to do in the next room. Let me just tell you that I need a favor. I need you to hire a guy. A former ambassador to Bulgaria. Ken Cochran. Not for long. Look, he’s a good man, a smart man; I think he’d make a very good corporate officer. Gross incompetence. I’ll be right back. Good morning, Nancy. Yeah, I’ll be right in. Ken. Thank you for flying in on such short notice. Resign. You’ve been having an affair with the daughter of the Prime Minister and that doesn’t work for me. But neither does the newspaper article saying you’re having an affair with the daughter of the Prime Minister. So, I need you to resign. You’re going to get a job offer from Ted Mitchell for a lot more money than you’re making now, that’s why you left the Embassy. I’ll be back in a minute.  Thanks for waiting. It doesn’t have anything to do with... Oh, wait a second. You two have a past? You mocked my finely honed sense. You stood there in my face... It’s done Ken. Ted Mitchell’s going to put you on the Board of Directors, and please remember that I have a lot of affection for your wife, and I would hate to see her be made a fool of. What’s that? Well, thanks for trying, but here I am anyway. Got to go. Look at that. 14 staffers in there. Yeah, but I don’t walk around with them, you know? Good morning. Max, I don’t need to know all the names. It’s okay. Please, sit down. You know what we’re doing here, right? We’re going to do more than talk about it. We agree on nothing, Max. Education, guns, drugs, school prayer, gays, defense spending, taxes, you name it, we disagree. ‘Cause I’m a lily-livered, bleeding-heart, liberal, egg head, communist. Yes, you are. We also agree on campaign finance. So, Max. Let’s work together on campaign finance. I don’t need them. 1978, the FEC voted a regulatory rule that opened the door to soft money. The FEC can close it again with 4 of the 6 votes. We don’t need a law. Two seats opened up, I nominated Bacon and Calhoun. Barry Haskel was with us already. We took him out of the closet. Toby’s going to take care of that right away. Max, can I count on your support to confirm my candidates?  The thanks of a grateful President.  Go.  Thank you. Kassenbach was okay? Kassenbach was okay? Did you tell him about the weather? Scuba diving? Full diplomatic immunity? Sure. Good evening, Josh. We’re having a fight with Alexis de Tocqueville? Yeah. What kind of briefcase did you get her, Sam? What kind of briefcase? That’s nice. Andare makes a nice model. Comes in black or brown, hand stained, fit a laptop, notebooks, the works. Trieste in Milan makes a nice briefcase. Okay, what’s next? Here’s another one. Two politicians are having an argument. One of them stands up and says, "You’re lying!" The other one answers, "Yes, I am, but hear me out." I don’t think I answered the last one. Suzanne’s got me telling jokes. Here’s an answer to your question that I don’t think you’re going to like the current crop of 18-25 year olds is the most politically apathetic generation in American history. In 1972, half of that age group voted. In the last election, 32%. Your generation is considerably less likely than any previous one to write or call public officials, attend rallies, or work on political campaigns. A man once said this, "decisions are made by those who show up." So are we failing you, or are you failing us? It's a little of both. . . .there’s a guy on my staff who showed me a report from the Center of Policy Alternatives that said 61% of your age group agree with the statement "Politicians and political officials - - have failed my generation. When asked how older generations see you, your answers were "lazy", "confused," and "unfocused". When asked how you see yourselves, your answers were "ambitious", "determined", and "independent".  but there was some debate amongst my staff earlier today as to whether or not I should take off my jacket. Some thought that it would fit in nicely with the folksy atmosphere of a town meeting, others thought that it wouldn’t be presidential. Can I trust you all to read nothing more into it than I’ve been talking for two hours and it’s a little hot under these lights? See all that ambition and determination doesn’t translate into political action, Suzanne. - that tax burden has crept further and further down the income and age ladder. And benefits are going more and more to the elderly and well-to-do. Totaling all payments to individuals... We spend nine times as much on the elderly as we do on a single child. No wonder this upcoming generation has turned its back on a government that’s forgotten them. Overall entitlement payments have crowded out public investment in infrastructure and they will have crowded out public investment in education., to say nothing of the general quality of life. So college kids are facing a future of having to pay higher taxes... Today’s young people aren’t exactly living for tomorrow. Generation x advocacy group third millennium, 53 of 18 to 25 year olds believe the soap opera General Hospital will outlast Medicare. This from a generation convinced that the generation before them has ransomed their generation’s future. That’s why my youngest daughter Zoey is always mad at me. This is the part where Zoey tries to crawl under a seat to hide. Don’t worry about it, sweetie, I’ll bring out the baby pictures any second now. Strange as it may seem, that was the first time in history that anyone had bothered to write that down. Thank you, everyone. God bless you, and God bless America. It seems to me that if this event is over by 10:00, then I can be back here by 11, and you know what that means. Did you just snicker when you said that? Yes, you did. Thanks, Lou.  When you said Girls Softball Game, you snickered. Yes, you snickered. As if to indicate there was something wrong with my wanting to see a girls’ softball game live via satellite. Thanks, Phil.  I am excited about it! You come to the end of a long day, you sit back, you open a beer, you watch a sporting event. That’s what men do. If that’s what’s on, then that’s what they watch. It’s either that, or a cricket match between Scotland and Bermuda. Now, I am an educated man, Charlie, but when someone tries to explain cricket to me, all I want to do is hit him in the head with a teapot. Good morning, Patty.  So, it’s softball. Sacramento State versus the University of the Pacific. Now, you’re not going to spoil my fun. I’m going to get back at the end of the day, sit back, open a beer... That’s right! Hey, Steve. Hey, Mikey.  Listen, have I got any of the names right so far? Okay. Good morning, everybody! Sure. And when I speak, I should stand facing the audience, right? Do you know how I know this, C.J.? Because I’ve done it 2,000 to 300,000 times before.  Hey, Sam. Why didn’t the Columbia land last night? The Space Shuttle was supposed to land last night, someone told me that it didn’t. Why don’t you go ask Toby? His brother’s on that flight. He’s a payload specialist. He’s up there with four red-bellied Japanese newts. He wants to see how a newt’s inner ears, which are remarkably similar to humans, are influenced by the absence of gravity.  Do you know what he calls them, C.J.? 100% right.  Go ask him why it didn’t land. C.J., you say I have a pitcher of water and a drinking glass. Now the water gets into the glass how? I proposed I wouldn’t say my administration is nibbling around the edges. I agree with you that far too many Americans don’t have adequate access to health insurance, and that far too many of them are children. Yes, we can and we must do more. Hang on.  Now can I blame Congress? Is the pilot still alive? He’s in the middle of nowhere. Our guy is ten miles from the Fourth Corps of the Iraqi Republican Guard? What’s his name? The pilot. What’s his name? Where’s he from? How old is he? Rob told me in my intelligence briefing last week that the Iraqi government has put out a bounty the equivalent of 14,000 dollars U.S on any American plane shot down, or any American soldier captured. Now, he was just patrolling the No Fly zone, right? He had not engaged. Bill, if it ends up that Fitzwallace has to call this kid’s parents, I swear to God I’m invading Baghdad.  Get him back. Expanding healthcare coverage for 5 million more poor children. Making healthcare portable for people who change jobs. You know what’s hard about all this, C.J.? I’m rehearsing here without the pitcher and glass, it’s totally weird for me. No, because with the mike and the stool, and the jacket thrown over my shoulder, and I can do the town hall meeting, and then do a couple of sets at the Copa. My musical director, Zoey Bartlet. We’re down to do I or do I not take my jacket off. I honestly couldn’t care less. Listen, I want you to come with us tonight. I’m fine. Yeah. Zoey! Are you channeling Mom, now? Come to Virginia tonight. It’s not like being there in person. Bonus. Then it’s settled. Okay. And you’re coming tonight. Thanks.  Gina. All right, everyone, we’re done. Thanks very much. Charlie, Zoey said you had something you wanted to mention? Zoey said you had something you wanted to mention. Are you sure? Okay. Yeah? A signal for what? What kind of signal did you have in mind? What is that? No, that one’s good. Well, I think it’s going to get around all by itself, but if you want to help it along a little, there’s nothing wrong with that. Yeah? Thanks. No. Hey, what was it that Zoey was talking about before? What was it? It has? What’s the report? Yeah? Thank you. Charlie, whatever it is, stick it in my briefcase, would you? Thank you. Fitz, do you have any news at all? Okay. No. I feel fine. Yeah, I feel fine. I don’t know. I honestly don’t know, Fitz. Fitz... The kid’s all right? Well, that’s, that’s a job awfully well done, Mr. Chairman. I owe you one. All the same, I’m going to check out that thing with the carpet. Seriously, I’m going to get an answer for you on that. Captain Hutchins, this is President Bartlet. How’s your ankle? Good. Now before you say another word, give me your parents’ phone number. I never get to make this call. Womens' softball. It’s going to be great. Mrs. Landingham? I’m watching a live sporting event from beginning to end tonight. You’re not going to spoil my good time for me, Mrs. Landingham. Yeah. Do you see me walking out the door? I’m leaving.  You know what, I'll be at the car in just a second. Thank you. Toby? Toby. You can’t see them, they’re over Australia now. I just spoke with the mission commander. They’re trying firing something called an RCS? If that doesn’t work, they’ve got about 39 other things they can try. There’s redundancy after redundancy after redundancy built in. And for good measure, they have Atlantis warming up on the launch pad. It can dock with the Columbia in about two hours. We can do that now, Toby. Then they’ll open those doors again. Same way they closed them - with a five-dollar wrench. When we’re done tonight, you should take the next flight out to Edwards’ Air Force Base, meet the thing when it lands, stop being a horse’s ass, and talk to your brother. Shuttle flies itself, Toby. No, it doesn’t. Thank you, thank you very much. That was a joke about politicians.  Two politicians are having an argument. The first one yells, 'but you’re lying!' and the other one answers, ‘yes, I know, but hear me out!" I don’t think I answered the last one. Suzanne’s got me telling jokes. Here’s an answer to your question that I don’t think you’re going to like. A man once said this, "decisions are made by those who show up." So are we failing you, or are you failing us?  A little of both. There’s a guy on my staff named Charlie Young, he showed me a report from the Center of Policy Alternatives that says that 61% of you agree with the statement "The older generation has failed my generation". When asked how the older generation sees you, your top answers are "lazy", "confused," and "unfocused". If I take my jacket off, can I trust you all to read nothing more into it than I’ve been talking for two hours and it’s a little hot under these lights? They’re telling me that we’re out of time. I just want to mention that at several points during the evening, I was referred to as both a liberal and a populist, and a fellow fourth from the back called me a socialist, which is nice, I haven’t heard that for a while. Actually, I’m an economics professor. My great-grandfather’s great-grandfather was Dr. Josiah Bartlet, who was the New Hampshire delegate to the second Continental Congress, the one that sat in session in Philadelphia in the summer of 1776... ...and announced to the world that we were no longer subjects of King George III, but rather a self-governing people. We hold these truths to be self-evident, they said, that all men are created equal. Strange as it may seem, that was the first time in history that anyone had bothered to write that down. Decisions are made by those who show up. Class dismissed. Thank you, everyone. God bless you. And God bless America. Toby! Walk with me. What have you got to say for yourself? Get her again. Get her on the radio, please! Why can’t she talk? Why the hell? Why is she vomiting? Ron... Is Gina with her? She’s not with her? Why isn’t Gina in the car? Is anybody dead back there? What happened to your hand?! Oh God.  Coop, turn around, we gotta go to the hospital. We’re going to the hospital! Let’s go! This is... my daughter is throwing up on the floor in the car behind us. You’re losing blood by the liter, not to mention how many broken bones you got in your hand, but let’s make sure that I’m tucked in bed before we do anything... I swear to God if I don’t speak to my daughter in the next five minutes, I’m gonna attack someone.  This guy’s got about seven broken bones in his hand, by the way. If somebody wants to give him an aspirin or something... Listen, I want you to wait as long as you can before you give me the anesthesia. I need to speak to Leo McGarry before you give me the anesthesia. Well... I’ve been shot. I’m okay. They didn’t hit anything. They’re just gonna look around and make sure. No. Yeah, ‘cause I want these guys to tell reporters that I was brave and joking around.  Honey, I’m fine. I’m just so happy to see you. Mom’s gonna be pretty pissed. She booted all over the back of her car. You know they’re gonna bill me for that. Honey, do me a favor, will you? Tell her not to frighten the doctors. I’ll see you in a couple hours. I love you too, hon. Anybody killed back there? Anybody in the crowd? What about our people?  Get the cabinet together and the Security Council. Tell Jerome to suspend trading on the stock exchange. Do we know who the shooters were? I’m gonna be under anesthesia for a couple hours. You know what I’m talking about, right?  Hey. Come here. It’s okay. ...Consumer price index, we tend to be late in responding to these trends, and we get what doctors call a "false positive". The science of economics is a lot less an exact science that we pretend. We build complex models with thousands of interdependent and independent variables. Let me put it another way: you and your husband pay $600 more every year than you would if you were unmarried, living together, and filing individually. Couples living outside the covenant of marriage do so. ...which then again is a much larger tax on overstated real profits. You really didn't understand any of that, right? Me too. Yeah?  Yeah, I screwed you on that one. I screwed you. You got hosed. And not just you. A lot of my constituents. I put the hammer to farms in Concord, Salem, Laconia, and Elem. You guys got rogered but good. Today, for the first time in history, one in five Americans living in poverty are children. One in five children live in the most abject, dangerous, hopeless, backbreaking, gut wrenching, poverty, one in five, and they're children. If fidelity to freedom and democracy is the code of our civic religion then surely, the code of our humanity is faithful service to that unwritten commandment that says "We shall give our children better than we ourselves had." I voted against the bill 'cause I didn't want it to be hard for people to buy milk. I stopped some money from flowing into your pocket. If that angers you, if you resent me, I completely respect that, but if you expect anything different from the President of the United States, I suggest you vote for somebody else. Thanks very much. Hope you enjoyed the chicken. Ron opens the door for Leo. I wanna see him. Please. Help me to the door. Charlie brought me some clothes. Please let me see him. Great. What's next? I understand. I understand the point that Cal was making. I was sitting next to him when he made it, my ears are connected to my brain just like every body else. And I'm saying what's next? You're not afraid he's gonna make me look like I can't remember his name? I am. I think it's going to make me look like I can't remember his name. I think it's going to make me look addled. I think it's going to make me look dotty. And even if it didn't make me look like those things it would remain a stupid idea. What's next? Nothing? Excellent.  Did you just fire Cal Mathis? You fired him. Is there anyone you kept? Oh, you kept Toby Ziegler, and you fired everyone else. Toby Ziegler is the only person working for us I don't know, and he's the one you kept! Those were the only people I know. So you made that decision on your own. You know I got elected to Congress by this state. This state sent me to Congress three times and elected me Governor all without your help. Don't start! Hey. You got rid of all the people I know! Why are you doing this? You're a player. You're bigger in the party than I am. Hoynes would make you national chairman. Leo! Tell me this isn't one of the twelve steps. Leo. And you think I'm that man. Does it matter that I'm not as sure? Yeah. Look what happened. We don't know what the injury count is, yet. Yeah. Charlie, the guy the Secret Service has in custody is named Carl Leroy. He gives a statement in which he says that he and the two shooters were members of an organization called West Virginia White Pride. Go.  We don't know what the injury count is, yet. It’s a very busy day at the headquarters. As the camera pans over volunteers, we see Toby drinking coffee. It stops on Bartlet himself, leaning on a table on which a taped news program is also running. MANCHESTER, NEW HAMPSHIRE I blew it. What's next? What's... next? Which one is Toby?  And which one are you? The New Hampshire primary isn't held in New Hampshire anymore? I am going to win the New Hampshire primary. I appreciate that, thanks. I know what he meant. We're not going to beat Hoynes in South Carolina.  Wiley's going to drop out after South Carolina? Are we going to get his endorsement? It's for sure? Which one is Josh? Okay. Well, that's it, then. And we saved people the trouble of voting. What's next? I understand the point. We're going to South Carolina to set up Illinois. When I ask, "What's next?", it means that I'm ready to move on to other things. So, what's next? Fantastic. Donna is sitting on Josh's desk at the campaign office, consulting his calendar as she talks on the phone. Leo! What the hell is this? "I congratulate my opponent on a well-fought campaign in Illinois"? Yes, I want to congratulate him, but I'd like to call him by his name! Are we back to this old crap again? Leo, I want to go over this whole thing with you. It's the exact same crap all over again! It's amateur hour...! Josh? Your father died, Josh. I can't believe it. What happened? It's a blood clot. Yeah... Yeah. He was a lawyer? Did he like that you were in politics?  He would've. He'd have been doing some bragging? He was already. Trust me, Josh, I'm a father. He was already. Nah, I'm okay. They'll wait. I've been a real jackass to you, Josh. To everybody. Toby Ziegler, C.J. Cregg, Sam Seaborn. Don't think I don't know what you gave up to work on this campaign, and don't think that I don't know your value. And I'll never make you think I don't again. You got to be a little impressed that I got all those names right just now. You want me to go with you? Maybe you want some company on the plane. I could get a ticket and come with you. I guess you're right. They're calling your flight. He's going to be fine. Leo? I'm ready. Tonight, what began on the commons in Concord, Massachusetts, as an alliance of farmers and workers, of cobbles man and tinsmiths, of statesmen and students, of mothers and wives, of men and boys, lives two centuries later as America! My name is Josiah Bartlet, and I accept your nomination for the Presidency of the United States! I couldn't hear you, Josh. He said, "What's next?" Good morning, everybody. Anybody know what the word 'acalculia' means? Yeah, but I'll get over it.  Shut up. No. Well 19% of the country has clearly made up their minds about me; 20% just feel sorry for me. This is what you want if you're the leader of the free world. Give us an over view. C.J., if you get questions about the midterms, say "we haven't thought that far ahead due to recent events." I'll let you know. Thank you very much, everyone. (reads the note) It's fine. Tell them around 3 o'clock. Was Zoey out there? Is she still here? Okay.  Leo. Did you know Elliot Roush is running to for the school board in Manchester? Elliot Roush. My Elliot Roush. I beat him in my first Congressional campaign. I want some polling numbers on that race. Yeah, 'cause looking at two numbers on a piece of paper really takes the life out of me. Get me the numbers. Let me tell you something... ...I'm ready to go out there. I don't need to wait another week. Get away from me. 46%. The guy is polling at 46%. They didn't. I had to have our guys do it. He's polling at 46%. He's not a joke. He's polling inside the margin. It has 1100 kids, and you don't take these people seriously 'cause they don't get anywhere nationally, but they don't have to. All they have to do is, bit by little bit, get themselves on the Boards of Education and city councils. 'Cause that's where all the governing that really matters to anybody really happens. I'm on hold with a guy whose name I've got on an index card. How much governing do you think is going on around here today? And can you believe I'm on hold? I did? How'd it go? Elliot Roush is now polling at 46%. I had our people...  I have 3 daughters who grew up in that school district. And he has come back. Like crab grass pulled from the lawn. Not by the root, but by the other thing. They're going fine. Can't tell you how much I'm going to miss you. (to Zoey) You wanted to talk to me? (big sigh) This is real and a man, who makes the Spanish Inquisition look like a Barbara Walters Special, is now polling at 46% in your school district, for which I have personally baked things to raise money. (to C.J.) You can go, too. (sternly) You can go. What do you want? Do we know how Tokyo opened? Is that it for me? Wyman? Frank Gates and McNamara? Those are campaign calls. Because I choose not to, Charlie. Because, however an empty gesture it may seem, I would like to take some executive notice of the notion that it's probably not a good idea for the most powerful and influential person in the world to be calling up the people whose laws he signs and asking them for money! (beat) I'm going to do it, but not behind this desk and not in this room. What else? Yeah. (takes the phone messages) I'll make these calls from the Residence. Tell C.J. I want to see her in an hour. Come in. Hi, C.J. Yeah. Why has there been no press mentioned that the fact that Elliot Roush was an opponent of mine in New Hampshire? He's running for a seat on the school board up in New Hampshire. Why isn't it more than local? It's a human interest story. I'm saying, if anyone in the Press Room wanted to do this story that I would comment on the record. Why can't he? I don't care about winning back the House. I don't care about winning back the House! C.J., I've known men of faith in my life. Towering men. Men of wisdom and compassion. Men of all faiths, of healing and peace. Pro choices, pro-life, Republican, Democrat, men and women of God. Elliot Roush... (long beat) ...is polling at 53%. He's polling at 53%. He's the front runner. Yeah. It was just a thought, but I mean, obviously, you're right. Thanks. Toby, I'm drinking the most fantastic thing I've ever tasted in my life: chocolate syrup, cold milk, and seltzer. I know it sounds terrible, but trust me, I don't know where this has been all my life. In Brooklyn. Not New England? Toby, don't ever let me hear you say that again. What's on your mind? You want to take a leave of absence. That's no problem, Toby. Not a problem at all. 15 minutes. It's time to get up off the mat, Toby. Toby.  It wasn't a shooting, Toby. It was a lynching. They tried to lynch Charlie right in front of our eyes, can you believe that? Keyhole satellite photographs. It's the headquarters for West Virginia White Pride headquarters. It's a diner outside Blacksberg. Every night for the past 12 weeks, I've picked up the phone and called the Attorney General, fully prepared to say two wordstake 'em. And then I hang up the phone because I know it'll be better tomorrow and better the day after that. We saw a lynching, Toby. That's why it feels like this. I'm not sure I can either. But until we are sure, I think we should keep coming into work every day.  Yeah, he's gonna win. I don't remember. I've been thinking about it for weeks, but I honestly don't remember. Hey, Sam. Let me look at them while we walk. Toby, go with us, to this radio thing. There'll be crab puffs. New England crab puffs, by the way, made in New England. There's Alaskan crab in this White House? Have you tried them? Were they good? Let's get there. Thank you. Thank you, very much. Thanks a lot. I wish I could spend more than a few minutes with you but the polls don't close in the east for another hour and there are plenty of election results left to falsify. You know with so many people participating in the political and social debate through call in shows, it's a good idea to be reminded... ...it's a good idea to be reminded of the awesome impact... the awesome impact... I'm sorry, um... you're Dr. Jenna Jacobs, right? It's good to have you here. The awesome impact of the airwaves and how that translates into the furthering of our national discussions but obviously also how it can... how it can... Forgive me, Dr. Jacobs. Are you an M.D.? A Ph.D.? In Psychology? Theology? Social work? I'm asking, 'cause on your show, people call in for advice and you go by the name of Dr. Jacobs on your show. And I didn't know if maybe your listeners were confused by that, and assumed you had advanced training in Psychology, Theology, or health care. Good. I like your show. I like how you call homosexuality an abomination. Yes, it does. Leviticus. Chapter and verse. I wanted to ask you a couple of questions while I had you here. I'm interested in selling my youngest daughter into slavery as sanctioned in Exodus 21:7. (small chuckles from the guests) She's a Georgetown sophomore, speaks fluent Italian, and always clears the table when it was her turn. What would a good price for her be? While thinking about that, can I ask another? My Chief of Staff, LeoO McGarry, insists on working on the Sabbath, Exodus 35:2, clearly says he should be put to death. Am I morally obligated to kill him myself or is it okay to call the police? Here's one that's really important, 'cause we've got a lot of sports fans in this town. Touching the skin of a dead pig makes us unclean, Leviticus 11:7. If they promise to wear gloves, can the Washington Redskins still play football? Can Notre Dame? Can West Point? Does the whole town really have to be together to stone my brother, John, for planting different crops side by side? Can I burn my mother in a small family gathering for wearing garments made from two different threads? Think about those questions, would you? One last thing, while you may be mistaking this for your monthly meeting of the Ignorant Tightass Club, in this building, when the President stands, nobody sits. Toby. That's how I beat him. Then you've got guys like Mbeki who turn around and say... ...that AIDS isn't linked to HIV, it's linked to poverty. Would you like me to show you the list of dead millionaires? Leo, AIDS is caused by HIV. You just named a group of people that have a higher mortality rate across the board. Morning, Charlie. Where are we? Thank you. They have a Health Minister who doesn't think AIDS is connected to HIV!  He got diced and sliced by a woman named Ainsley Hayes. I know, I had Charlie pull 'em for me. Where's she been? We should hire her. No, I mean it. We should hire her. No, not as a joke, I mean we should hire her as a reality. We should hire her. So are half the people in this country. She's smart, she's not just carping. She feels a sense of something. Yeah.  Of duty. Of civic duty. Three. I can sense civic duty a mile away. Morning. Good morning. Morning everybody. Good morning, Mr. President.  You can tell your caption editors that Bartlet's the third guy from the right. Katie.  Yes, Katie, I'm trying to shore up the sub-Saharan vote. It's an international health crisis; there's nothing I'm not considering.  That's right. His name is Norman Borlaug, by the way, and he won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1970.  I think you're absolutely right about the kind of miracle we need. I think we're gonna make a lot of progress in the next few days. It was called dwarf wheat, which produces heavy yields without its stalk falling over from the weight of the rain. What am I, Farmer Bob? It was wheat, and there was more than there used to be. And hire that girl. Ainsley Hayes. Why?  Not one of those. Leo, as hard as you might try, the Republican Party isn't going anywhere. I don't think so. Charlie, I want to hire a woman whose voice I think would fit in nicely around here, she's a conservative Republican. Do you think I should do it? Leo. We might do that, Leo. A hundred million Republicans; we might hire as many as two of them. But for now, hire this girl.  I don't know. She's a lawyer. Put her in the counsel's office. Yes. Appeal to her sense of duty. And smooth it over with the staff. Really, I don't want to hear from them. Yes, she can. Thank you. Charlie. When they close the book on me and you, it will say that at this moment you were not there for me, and for that, obviously, there'll be some kind of punishment. 600? Television and radio? When do I see pictures, and who's gonna tell me what I'm looking for?  I want Fitzwallace and Nancy.  Leo. Mr. President, three hours ago there was a coup in your country. The AFRC has taken the capital. We're finding out. The information's coming very quickly now from our people in Angola and Sudan. Mr. President, I think you should sit. No, no, sir! My State Department is offering you asylum in the U.S. You can't go home. You can't go home! They have the capital, they have the radio station, they have the television station. I'm evacuating the embassy. Yes. I don't need to trade you! If they won't give me the Americans, we'll go and get 'em ourselves, and they know that, and they'll let 'em go. They will shoot you the moment you step off the plane. We think your brother and your two sons are already dead. We think your wife is being hidden in Kenya. You understand, don't you, why I can't offer military assistance? Sit down, sir. You ever read Paul Erlich's book? Yeah. He wrote it in 1968. Erlich said it was a fantasy that India would ever feed itself. Then Norman Borlaug comes along. See the problem was wheat is top-heavy. It was falling over on itself and it took up too much space. The dwarf wheat... guys, it was an agricultural revolution that was credited with saving one billion lives. They executed him in the airport parking lot. Okay. I'll see you Monday. He gets up and leaves the office. How’s it going? That’s almost hard to believe, Donna.  How is everybody? Not quite. The speech. Thank you. Let’s do this in one, shall we? One-take Bartlet. That’s what old Jack Warner used to call me. Good morning. This month, as autumn is in full bloom in much of the nation, the weekends will be devoted by many of you to leaf peeping and football... watch... ing...  I’m sorry. Leaf peeping? Is that something we do now? I heard that. Sorry, everybody. This is gonna be it. Four is my lucky number. Five is my lucky number. "Fifth-take Bartlet" -- that's what Jack Warner used to call me. Yeah, because I used to be a contract player in Hollywood and I'm 97 years old. Here we go. 'Our farming families stand for the values that keep our nation strong: faith, calm perseverance, and patience...' I had it! It's a bit of a bad time, Lionel... And we will, Lionel, but right now I don't know if you noticed but there are thirty or forty other people in the room, many of whom have donated significant amounts of money to the Democratic Party, so perhaps you could put a tighter grip on your horses and we will talk about it later. Well, obviously, Lionel Tribbey is a brilliant lawyer whom we cannot live without, or there would be very little reason not to put him in prison. Let's try again. Really? Good afternoon, Mrs. Landingham.  Go away right now. Not for long, Mrs. Landingham. Absolutely! Who cares? It’s been 14 weeks! Do these curtains close? Yes. You’re right... where? New Hampshire is an hour and a half away by plane. I don’t think I have that kind of time.  Yes! We have a bedroom right here in the building. That was so smart! Let’s go! What? Oh God... I hate plutonium! What happens at six? Where the hell is Cochran’s Mills? Right.  I don’t think it’s gonna take more than a couple of minutes, but I like your confidence. Can’t we just close the curtains? Is this still my first term? Here we go. Good evening. What? It's evening. It's dark outside, Charlie. What time is it? Excuse me... No. I can't. I've got to go. Kids, I am so sorry. I have to go now, to a special meeting... of the government. I will mail you all an autographed copy of the picture we took together. And one day, you will all understand. Take a break, Charlie. I'm going to a special meeting... Sure. Would you like to get that smile off your face before I send you on special assignment to the Yukon? Guys, it's very important that nobody tries to kill me in the next hour or so. I was on a conference call with Cardinal Law and the Archbishop of Chicago. Yeah. "Excuse me, Your Eminence, but the First Lady is a little randy, and she says I'm good to go".  Good, take your clothes off. Get 'em off. Abbey, you have two minutes, or I swear to God I'm gonna get Mrs. Landingham drunk. What was that thing you were doin'? Tonight, in Pennsylvania. It was a monument dedication, a statue? Statue to who? You went all the way to Cochran's... whatever to dedicate a monument to Nellie Bly? Abbey, you can really pass that kind of thing along. You don't have to accept every invitation from every yahoo historical society that knows someone in the Social Office. If you want, I can have Charlie-- You haven't changed into the "special garment". Yeah. You know what I did, just then, that was stupid?  I minimized the importance of the statue that was dedicated to Nellie Bly, an extraordinary woman to whom we all owe a great deal. This isn't happening to me. Then she's the one I want to beat the crap out of. Yes, Abigail-- She sounds like an incredible woman, Abbey. I'm particularly impressed that she beat a fictional record. If she goes twenty-one thousand leagues under the sea I'll name a damn school after her. Let's have sex. I couldn't possibly hear about the rest of the iceberg right now. Keep talking. I'm just gonna sit here and think about plutonium and the things I can do with it. Belva Lockwood, for instance, the first woman to practice law: she argued a case in front of the U.S. Supreme Court in 1879, decades before she'd have the right to vote. Ellen Swallow Richards, the first woman to be a professional chemist. Maria Mitchell, who discovered a comet in 1847, and was the first woman admitted to the Academy of Arts and Sciences. Oh I could go on and on, and on, and on. The fact remains that of all the monuments built with public money, only fifty of them pay tribute to the women who helped build this country, and opened its doors to all our daughters who would follow. In the coming months, I'll try to persuade Congress to rectify that. In the meantime, enjoy your weekend. God bless you, and God bless America. Do it live, that's what I always say. By the way, sweet knees, the Statue of Liberty. Right there at the front door to the country! Like a lawn jockey. No, it's okay.  I'll be right behind you. Go. Is this about Ed Barrie? Go ahead and let him out of the box. Say what you want about Barrie, and I could say plenty, but the man was the first one in and the last one out of a war that I didn't want anything to do with. Man's earned the right to say whatever he wants. Let him out of the box, would you? Anything else? I'm outta here. It's like trying to run the country with Barnum Bailey and his sister Sue. Leo, will it be possible for just two of them to speak at once?  Charlie! Could I have a couple of aspirin and a weapon of some kind to kill people with? Leo? What do you want to do? Thank you all. When does Konanov get here? No high level meetings, right? Okay. Yeah, but this could be window. We've got see if it's doable. It could be doable. You got anything more to say? Okay. Thank you. No more Rouge Nations, huh? Well that was easy. What's doing, Claudia Jean? Yeah, let's do it. Why not? Yeah, they've been way off base. Not so much the second one. But the first, third and fourth were silly. And the fourth was mean spirited. Nah. First of all, it wasn't Danny. Nah. It's going to look petty and petulant. You know why? Because it's petty and petulant. Yeah, but not having to run for anything tends to help with honesty and decisiveness.  Thanks, Charlie, send Danny in, would you please? I really don't, C.J.  Is this personal? I hear things, I don't understand most of it, but I hear it. He's a great reporter, and you're a great Press Secretary. And that's why it was never going to work while the two of you had those jobs.  Hey, Danny. Danny, I think you guys have had your heads up your asses for the last few weeks, I hope you don't mind me saying so. Not only that, but I think you've been trying to bait me. Which is a waste of time, paper and ink. I'm like 50 times smarter than any of you will ever be. I have an election to win in two years, and I'm not about to alienate the Washington Post. I'll tell you what I will do, though, I'm cancelling our subscription. No, I meant just mine and Abbey's. I'll borrow a copy from somebody. Yeah. Take it easy, Danny.  C.J.'ll give you all the access you want. Vasily! Vasily Konanov, why you're the last person I expected to be where they told me to go. Thank you, Donna.  Thank you, gentlemen. Vasily?  I don't know who this is. What the hell are you doing? I'm not the transportation secretary. You will join the WTO when you reduce the 300% tariff on America cars, and with a nuclear weapon pointed at my head I will not talk to you about nuclear compatibility. Vasily, you're a reformer and you're going to do good things in Eastern Europe and I'm looking forward to the day when you're President. But until that time comes, my State Department deals with the government of the Ukraine. Now you can go home and so exactly what you wanted to do.  To say you met with the President of the United States.  You just did. How ya doing? Come. Thanks, you can take off for the night, Charlie, we're done.  Tony Marino's going to abstain, huh? He was a great public servant, Toby, a great Senator. Yeah. and then he was voted out of office five years later by the people of Bristol. I know. The fact is the opponents of the treaty are on both sides of the isle. You've got to respect them, Toby. They're politicians and they're flying in the face of overwhelming public opinion. Can I tell you something, honestly? This is one of those situations where I couldn't give a damn what the people think. The complexities of a global arms treaty, the technological, the military, the diplomatic nuances, it's staggering, Toby. 82% of the people cannot possibly be expected to reach an informed decision.  You want to call a session anyway? Yeah.  Anything else? You know we forget sometimes, in all the talk about democracy we forget it's not a democracy, it's a republic. People don't make the decisions, they choose the people who make the decisions. Could they do a better job choosing? Yeah. But when you consider the alternatives, anyway, Abbey's in New Hampshire, you want to come up for a cigar? The day's over, Toby. We'll live to fight another one. Come up, and I'll beat your ass at chess. Yes.  If anyone's out there, I'm signing off. Have a good night. He wants to meet with me on the way back? On the way back? The Assistant Energy Secretary is flying to Portland in the middle of the night so he can meet with me on Air Force One on the way back? The day-to-day experience of my life has changed in many ways since taking this job. How're you doing? I'm sorry? You didn't say 'Michigan sucks'? I thought you said 'Michigan sucks.' Yeah. Whose? You think they've got oil? We gonna board them? Anything else I should know? I'll see you tomorrow night. Thank you! Hey, C.J.! I think it's great you decided to make the trip. Yes. I remember now. You made one of your funny, funny jokes. Put it on. Put it on. Put it on! Hey, photo op. Let's hit the sky! C.J.! What does the island of Qais mean to you? About two hours ago we stopped a Cyprus-flagged ship called "The Nicosia." We believe it to be carrying petroleum products out of Iraq, in violation of UN sanctions. We board the stip, we test a sample of the oil, we determine its point of origin and if it's black-market, the oil company gets fined. Yes. It dramatically exceeds the fine! So what do you think we should do? I agree. Charlie? It would please me if you would lead the press in a rendition as we pass over South Bend. All five verses, please. You bet your ass! What's our goal? What are we trying to do? All right. The F-18 pilots? Leo, just so they know--it's a tanker full of crude oil. If they miss the propeller and hit something else--- What was that? Why? I didn't know that. Okay. Why don't I have a final draft of tomorrow morning's...? What's wrong with it? Sam wrote it. All right.  Why? It's a northeastern thing? What about Miami and San Francisco? Come in! So pavement's going to win this battle? Okay, thanks, Steve. Thank you, Mike.  Ernesto Perez Balladares, former President of Panama. You know where he went to school? Notre Dame. Was that a crack?  Yeah, but we gotta do it later. The Tokyo Exchange just opened and I'm gonna gauge the impact on Pacific Rim Banking Reforms. A subject economics scholars could take years on, I will take 20 minutes. I thought we left on time. You don't like late flights? A long flight across the night? You know why late flights are good? Because we cease to be earthbound and burdened with practicality. Ask the impertinent question. Talk about the idea nobody has thought about yet.  Put it a different way. If you absolutely must. In education? Mao took a lot of long plane flights, Toby. Look out your window. Is there anything more romantic than that?  No, we left at 905 because they thought my budget meeting might run over. But wouldn't that have been great if that was the reason?  You don't like "permanent revolution"? We're flying, Toby. Live a little.  Yeah? Oh, Leo, just take the damn boat... Actually, it was two rooms. Italian stonecutters were paying her to teach their kids English in the basement of the rectory. They put up a wall and made it two rooms as a thank you gift. I haven't heard the big idea yet. Yeah.  What happened to 100,000 new teachers? No money? Toby! We can give incentives. Well, it's not doing the trick.  Tuition incentives. Talk, Charlie. I find fault with that formula. What? Why can't that idea be floated? That comes later. Kick this around.  I'll be in my study. It's an incredible sky tonight.  Yeah? Yeah? It doesn't do anything to hold the ship in Bahrain Yeah. You know what's going to happen? They'll sell off the cargo in a friendly port. 780,000 metric tons of gas oil against a two million dollar fine for the oil company. Which their profits from the sale will more than cover. We're not providing much of a disincentive to evade U.N. sanctions. If we're going to have sanctions at all, I think we should make them stick. I think that we should confiscate the cargo, seize the ship, sell the oil and use the money to beef up anti-smuggling operations.  Yeah. In the future.  You need me?  Yeah.  Yeah. I don't care about the constitutional argument. It's gay bashing. It's legislative gay bashing. How do I put my name on it? Pocket veto's a politician's way out. If I'm going to sign it in January, why am I vetoing it now? I'm sure the gay community can't wait to thank me. This is just wrong.  You can look at the policy numbers and Article IV and Social Security benefits. It doesn't matter. It's just wrong. We shouldn't be defining love and we certainly shouldn't be ill-defining it. It's wrong. This is the job for... This is the job of somebody else. It's wrong. I should get out a rubber stamp that says 'Josiah Bartlet votes no.' I should get out a rubber stamp! Put it in a drawer. Yeah? Yeah. There was a question? Why not? Because I was thinking about becoming a priest. Yeah. I met Abbey. Because I like to bother you. Sit down. Toby. Toby, you should sit down. We're landing in one minute and ten seconds. I set my watch to the cockpit computer. You should sit down. Do you know why the Assistant Energy Secretary is on the plane? That's right. They're taking the tanker to Bahrain and then the company's going to make a profit. The Marriage Recognition Act is going to be law. 100 new teachers? Instead of 100,000. Well, it's a start I guess. Ah! Yes, yes! Indeed I do. Chef's choice. Twice the amount of carbon, which means it'll hold a sharp edge up to ten times longer and you can see the handle which texturized molded polymer has no rivets or air pockets. This is an American knife. No German knives for us. Good job. Hold on. Nah... Nah. No, the balance isn't right. Yeah. You know what we need? Yeah. You tell him they already briefed me on San Diego. Okay. The German's know how to make a knife, Charlie!  Josephine McGarry? She's a controversial woman. It is when it's a recess appointment. A recess appointment assumes the Senate's gonna have no problem with the nominee. The Senate is going to have a considerable problem with this nominee. Toby... Yes, I do. I got to say... look, I'm just... Toby, I'm not wild about the woman. I've known her for 25 years and I think she's all about Eve. Yeah. Recess appointments. Hey Leo... Josey. Assistant Secretary for Primary and Secondary Education. We want the debate. She did not call me. Not patronate, yet she's qualified.  Take the meetings.  Yeah? What? You're kidding me. You're kidding me! Yeah. Yeah?  What am I doing? Okay. Excellent.   The Missermeister. Meridian 3000 series. One-piece forged blade, riveted palm handle. I don't like the handles. How's it going? You met with Chinese embassy officials? Christians aren't persecuted in China. Since they aren’t oppressed, they don't qualify for refugee status. It's a fair point. Yeah. They'll be coached. Do you guys know what a "shibboleth" is? It's from the Bible. "Then said now unto him, say now “shibboleth" and he said "sibboleth" for he could not frame to pronounce it right." It was a password, the way the army used to distinguish true Israelites from impostors sent across the river Jordan by the enemy. I'm having one of the Chinese refugees flown here. I'll meet with him tonight. Yep. I'm going to ask him to say "Shibboleth." Is he here? Good. He speaks English. He’s a chemistry professor.  There was a while there I wanted to be a chemistry professor. I never actually studied chemistry. Yeah. Jhin-Wei? I’m Jed Bartlet. This is Leo McGarry. Thanks for coming all this way. Would you care to sit down? It’s perfectly all right.  There are some sandwiches here. If you get hungry, feel free to eat as much as you want. There are questions as to the veracity of your claim to the asylum. How did you become a Christian? How do you practice? Who’s the head of your church? Can you name any of Jesus’ disciples?  If you can’t, that’s okay. I usually can’t remember the names of my kids, or for that matter...  It was a pleasure to meet you. Right. We don’t have to grant asylum. Where are they? Not the Coast Guard? Before... when it happened before... how did it work?  Mrs. Landingham? I need to talk to the Governor of California. Mrs. Landingham, can I look at a copy of the Thanksgiving proclamation? ‘Cause... I was standing at the door.  Can I look at a copy...? What you got, Charles? Lighter weight blade. I once test-drove the Komin Yomada. Not wild about it--How about this? Because it’s something we pass on. Something with a history so we can say, “My father gave this to me. His father gave it to him, and now I’m giving it to you.” I do have one. I’m giving mine away. Whom. Funny you should ask. Charlie, my father gave this to me, and his father gave it to him, and now I’m giving it to you. Take a look. The fully tapered bolster allows for sharpening the entire edge of the blade. Yeah. This was made for my family by a Boston silversmith named Paul Revere. I’m proud of you, Charlie. Yeah. Yeah? Hi. Not too late to stop yourself. I already pardoned a turkey. Didn’t I do it right? Aren’t I gonna get a reputation for being soft on turkeys? No, I’m not just gonna get this--What the hell is going on? If the Oscars were like that, I’d watch. Just buy the second turkey. There’s not much I can do. The turkey hasn’t committed a crime. C.J., I have really no judicial jurisdiction over birds. Who’s Morton...? He’s in high school and he doesn’t know I can’t pardon his turkey? C.J., if we don’t and I mean completely overhaul public education in this country... Where the hell is he? Hey, Morton. Well said. Is that the turkey?  You’re pardoned. What do you want?  By the power vested in me by the Constitution of the United States, I hereby pardon you. No, it’s not okay. Morton, I can’t pardon a turkey. If you think I can pardon a turkey, then you have got to go back to your school and insist that you be better prepared to go out in the world.  No. I tell you what I can do. I’m drafting this turkey into military service. In the meantime, somebody will be drafting a check, which will have my signature on it, so the folks can buy themselves a Butterball.  What’s wrong with him?  I’m still waiting for the thing. Let’s go in. Give me two minutes. Whatever! By the way, the Latin word for “yam” is “dioscorea.” About the Chinese refugees? Yeah. Can you believe it? That detention center was being guarded by the 22nd Division of the California National Guard. Now, what does it say about our reserve army? Let me read this. “Well over three and a half centuries ago, strengthened by faith and bound by a common desire for liberty, a small band of pilgrims sought out a place in the New World where they could worship according to their own beliefs. Now therefore I, Josiah Bartlet, President of the United States, by virtue of authority and laws vested in me, do hereby proclaim this to be a National Day of Thanksgiving.”  And call in the Red Cross. We didn’t do anything illegal. We’re not involved in any massive criminal conspiracy. There’s no way I was letting them go, and we needed to help China save face, so now they can tell their people that the mighty American military was overpowered by... You think I would’ve sent him back if he’d failed catechism? Let me tell you something. We can be the world’s policeman. We can be the world’s bank, the world’s factory, the world’s farm. What does it mean if we’re not also... We’ve made it into the New World, Josh. You know what I get to do now? I get to proclaim the National Day of Thanksgiving.  This is a great job. Galileo V. Just the name... You can feel the adventure. NASA's great at naming things. Mercury, Apollo, Atlantis, the Sea of Tranquility, the Ocean of Storms... First time I heard ‘Galileo V,’ the way the imagination immediately... It reminded me of the way folks in my generation felt when we heard "Yellow Submarine." We really did all want to live in a yellow submarine. Tell me where we're going again. Why? Say the name. Say it again. Your imagination, like a child, will explode with unrestrained possibilities for adventure. You didn't say it right. Say it again. Good morning! How you doing? Yes. I know. Yes. We have questions in advance? Katie, sixth grade, Green Oaks Junior High School, Austin, Texas, asks, "How old is the planet Mars?" That's a great question, Katie. The planet Mars is 4.6 billion years old. I knew that one. Yes, God forbid, that while talking to 60,000 public school students, the President should appear smart! I don't show off.  Stevie, fourth grader, PS 31, Manhattan, asks, "What is the temperature on Mars?" Well, Stevie, if one of our expert panelists were here, they would tell you the average temperature ranges from 15 degrees to minus 140. I converted it to Celsius in my head. Can I see the intro?  "Good morning! I'm speaking to you live from the West Wing of the White House. Today we have a very unique opportunity to take part live in an extremely historic event which..." Whoa, boy... Who wrote this intro?  Scott. "Unique" means "one of a kind." Something can't be very unique, nor can it be extremely historic. Sam?  He's gonna make some changes.  He said it right. Yeah. What else? Okay, but then, let's bring the curtain down. I got a great night planned. I got two books on Mars and one on Galileo himself. I'm gonna go to the Residence and read.  Nothing after 6:30. I'm gonna go to the Residence and read about Mars, which while colder and drier, has four Earth-like seasons. It does! Since when? Get me Leo! To a concert? Did Buddy Holly come back? The Reykjavik Symphony Orchestra?  Leo! I know where Reykjavik is, Charlie. I wish I was there right now. The Reykjavik Symphony Orchestra? Why do I...? I'm being punished. Is this a joke? Which we did, by canceling the meeting yesterday. So to make up for it, I'm going to see the Reykjavik Symphony. With, uh, Ambassador... Okay. I'll give you a thousand dollars if you don't make me go. Do they vote? Yeah. Send them in. Why? Ah. Hey, Jack. Charlie. Gentlemen, please. There was an explosion? What's the problem Jack? It's not a refinery fire? There was an explosion in a missile silo? If a missile exploded, is it possible it was armed? Was there a warhead? Thank you. Did they really think we weren't gonna see it, Leo? If they asked, we could help. Yeah. Yeah. Galileo Galilei. He sat in a cathedral in Pisa. He watched a lamp suspended from the ceiling as it oscillated back and forth. He used his pulse to keep time and discovered that the period of oscillation was independent of the size of the arc. A few years later he contradicted the theory that a heavier body falls faster than a lighter one. Which took some guts back in 1609, when you consider that the theory he was contradicting was Aristotle's.  I really do. Have Sam and C.J. come along tonight. Thanks. He contradicted Aristotle, Charlie. Yes, he did. Yes. What's next? What do you think happened? Where are we with the Russian ambassador? Leo, I want you to see her as soon as she can get here. Thank you everybody. Leo? We lost the signal from Galileo. Do you know what they’re playing? The Reykjavik Symphony. Do we know what they’re playing and for how long they’re playing it? Turn the car around. Turn the car around. Modern music sucks. Anything written after 1860 sucks. Sucks. Sucks. Totally blows. Played on teapots and gefilte fish. If he wants more time, I’d be happy to take a rain check. This is not classical music. It is not classical music if the guy finished writing it this afternoon. C.J.! A broader theme. I don’t get that many opportunities to talk with kids. Yeah, but let’s let 'em work for a while. Where’s Sam? Why is he hiding from Mallory? Not at all. I took trombone lessons when I was a kid. Not much solo music written for the trombone, but I wanted to play in the marching band. The thing was my arms were too short to reach seventh position. One afternoon, during the game, I gave it all I had and ended up throwing the slide into the end zone, which is more than I can say for our quarterback. Would you excuse me just one moment? Galileo? Yeah, what?  What about Galileo? Okay. Yeah.  Somebody was draining hydrogen? Yeah? Thanks.  Your paranoia was a lot sexier back when you guys are communists. From where do you get the nerve and try to dictate terms on this? Are you insane? Your missile regimen is in a horrifying state of disrepair. Your best-trained operators have left or died. The ones you’ve got aren’t paid very much when they’re paid at all. They don’t have enough to train with. Your ICBMs are well behind their warranty life. Not seven weeks ago, you mistook a Norwegian weather rocket for a submarine launch Trident missile because the CrossTac information never made it to the Russian C&C system.  Leo, at the time the S.S.19 exploded, it was being drained of its liquid hydrogen in an attempt by deserting soldiers to -- wait for it -- Steal the warhead!  When were you gonna tell us about that? You realize how dangerous... Well, I am concerned with the welfare of the Russian people, but that’s not what they pay me for. You guys fall asleep in the switch in Minsk, and I’ve got a whole hemisphere hiding under the bed. How do you not tell us this is going on? How do you not ask us for help? Yeah, thanks. We’re sending in NATO inspectors. Get your Foreign Minister on the phone. I really don’t know from where you guys get the nerve. This is still my office, right? Nothing new from NASA? Earth’s giving it instructions? Like my kids. All right... Green beans? Yeah, okay. What about the stamp? What? All right. Everybody go away. We’ll call you back when there’s a NASA update. C.J.? Did you hear the end of the concert? Well, first of all, let’s not kid ourselves. The Reykjavik Symphony can play. These guys have some serious game. In this particular case, their talents were tragically misapplied to an atonal nightmare of pretention, but after intermission... They played a piece by a new composer. First, I wasn’t hearing it. I had 19 different things on my mind, but then I did, and C.J., it was magnificent. It was genius. He built these themes, and at the beginning, it was just an intellectual exercise, which is fun enough, I guess, but then in the fourth movement, he just let it go. I really didn’t think I could be surprised by music anymore. I thought about all the times this guy must’ve heard that his music was no good... I’ve got to write this guy a letter. I’m gonna wait up for a while. See if we hear anything. It’s out there somewhere... It’s so close. Yeah? I’ll say. C.J.? You said it right that time. Talk to us. What’s going on? Sit down. What does that mean? Is he in there alone? Is there a crew? Did he crash? Is there any chance he’s trying to contact the ground and can’t? Is his intention to defect with a military asset or his intention to blow something up? Don’t our fighter pilors have to go through some kind of psychological testing? Let me ask a ridiculous question and I know the answer is no. Is there any way to bring this plane down without shooting it down? What about populated areas? Yeah okay. I'd stay on the phone with Cashmen and Berryhill. They're going to know when the F-16's have painted him before I will. Thank you. When I was in tenth grade me and my friends took my dad's Ford Country Squire for a joyride to Vermont. He locked me in the garage till Easter. What do you think we should do with this pilot once we get his ass on the ground?  No. What about them? I'm gonna sign them all by hand. I'm gonna sign them all by hand. I don't like the whole idea of the autopen. Let's do them all by hand. How many can there be? How many am I sending out? Seriously? I'm sending out 1.1 million Christmas cards?  Who are the other million? I do? Okay, but some of those were death threats. Well, I'm not signing 1.1 million cards. 1.1 million cards?  Yeah? What happened? OPEC will find a way to punish us. If the Saudis are that concerned, why don't they just make the old faster? I didn't think so. Let's set up a meeting. You sold me. We're setting up a meeting.   Why? Well, I'm just talking about a meeting, but if I decide to do it, the President controls the SPR and not Congress. The two aren't related. How? I'm saying the Strategic Petroleum Reserve and forgiving the IMF debt are not related. We'll talk to him tonight. At the Christmas party, we'll take him aside... Josh, Didion's a good guy, we can talk to him. We'll talk with Didion tonight? By the way, it's not intervention in a free market if that's what he's worried about. It's not free trade if the price of oil is being controlled by a cartel. Sam, you'll be in on this? Thank you. You look good, Charlie. I've brought it back. Like Woodrow Wilson and top hats. No. Thank you. Charlie, this is how Statesmen dress. This is how they dress in times of occasion. It's regal. We have polling that indicates that if Johann Sebastian Bach were alive today, he would have voted for me. The Bach Suite in G Major. Please help me in welcoming Yo-Yo Ma. What?! What's after that? After that? Who was the idiot who set off the smoke detector? They had me on the Truman balcony for 6 minutes in my underwear. In January? No. Why do you ask? We're having Vermont maple syrup? I don't give a damn if they call it the Monroe doctrine. What the hell are we doing serving Vermont maple syrup? New Hampshire syrup is what we serve in this White House. It's a breakfast. We eat. We pose for pictures. You do a post-game conference. Everybody gets the hell out of here and I don't have to be so Officer Crupky. Thank you. Charlie! Who’s the next meeting? I don’t need a cheat sheet.  Kim Woo, he won a bronze medial for fencing, he’s a Buddhist, and he enjoys European History. You see Charles’s even thought it’s a handshake, I’m able to make him feel like a friend and that’s a little thing they call ‘people skills.’ The man’s an Olympic athlete, Charlie. I wouldn’t say that to his face. What else? on glasses, reads] Ladies and Gentleman.  She’s a woman? Did you mark that down?  Did you know it’s bad luck to toast with water? Yeah, you don’t want to make a toast with water. From Greek mythology, I’m almost sure. You lose your spirit.   Hmm? That’s a great question, Charlie, and I could tell you, but I think it’s better if you look it up on your own.  Remind me to tell Sam that’s good. And remind me not to make a toast with water. Ah. Let’s go... I think the whole damn thing is bizarre. The right moment for what? Well, I’m not sure there is a right moment for you to ask me that, Charlie. Yeah. Donna wants me to call Karen Cahill and make it clear she wasn’t hitting on her when she gave her her underwear. There can’t possibly be nuclear weapons in Kyrgyzstan. Okay. Yeah.  I’m going to bed. If anybody thinks of new ways for us to make friends don’t hesitate to wake me. Or, you know, just feel free to start a fire. Good night. Mr. Sumatra, I understand you're a sports fan. Okay. Well, golf's not a sport. It's fine. Don't get me wrong but let's not you and I confuse it with things that men do. You know, we're going to Bangkok in June, I think.  June, Charlie? Best hotel in the world, right? Is that right?  Make sure I see that.  Tom? Mr. Sumatra, I accept your letter of credence from King Adulyadej and by affixing my signature and seal,  do hereby declare you to be an ambassador extraordinary and plenipotentiary. May our people know peace and prosperity.  Congratulations. We've got some gifts here and we're going to stand for pictures.  Madam, congratulations.  What's up? And I'm sure somebody will come along soon thereafter and tell it didn't work. Cause it's not going to work. What do you get? Well, I can't make you Thailand's ambassador to the United States because I just signed that guy's letter.  You know what you are? You are the Charlie Brown of missile defense. The Pentagon is Lucy. Peanuts. Charlie Brown. Why? Leo, were you born at the age of 55? Charlie Brown wanted to kick a football and Lucy would hold it, except she'd pull it away at the last minute and Charlie Brown would fall on his butt. No, but each time Lucy would find a way to convince Charlie Brown that this time she wouldn't pull the ball away. But she would and, once again, Charlie Brown would fall on his butt. Its' satirical. The DOD bringing you to the Situation Room every time they run a new missile test so that you come tell me how great it works so I'll put money in the NMD system. It doesn't work. Hey, where are we? And it's going to hit my garage in New Hampshire when? So what happens now? Where? Okay, but we don't have anybody out there right now do we? When we stay at the Oriental in Bangkok, we have to check out James Michener's typewriter. Is that silence usually a pretty good sign? It was just enthusiastic. When you consider the size of outer space, Leo, that's not so bad. By the way, the words you're looking for are "Oh good grief."  I think a lot of people don't realize that Swedes have lived in Sweden more than 5,000 years longer than nearly any other European people. In fact, Gothic tribes from Sweden played a major role in the disintegration of the Roman Empire, did they not? So you've got that to answer for!  Congratulations. Sweden has a 100% literacy rate, Leo, a hundred percent! How do they do that? Maybe. Yes? The tenth being?  Damn! So close. That tenth one! See, if there were just nine... Leo, seriously, when they were telling you that on the phone, how stupid did you think you'd sound saying that to me? It doesn't work. Do we need to decide this right now? Okay.  Yeah? How? For example? And we can't take it for granted that everyone pretty much fundamentally opposes arson? It would be hypocrisy not to hold our friends to the same standard... Yet it feels strange to score political points by doing the right thing.  I'm victim to my own purity of character. Okay, well, it's not a kind of a possum, so why don't you get me that information. Toby doesn't want it in the speech? Did you hear? Ain't it great? Absolutely. No.  2,000 environmentalists are going to try to kill me tomorrow night! They're going to come at me with vegan food and pitchforks! Still, I'd like you to get between me and any boiled seaweed you see coming my way. Leo just talked to me. Yeah, I'm not doing this for the politics, I'm doing it because it's the right thing to do. A lynx isn't a possum. It's a cat. How did Sam feel about this?  Toby? I'm not going to tell you how to run your office, Toby.  Vegan food. Coming at me all night long.  John!  It's good to have you here. What made you agree to take the post? Listen, I gotta go a few blocks across town to give an address on global warming and the future of our planet. That's not something you're interested in, right? Okay. Well, stay here and fight with Leo about something. We'll get you some dinner. I'll be back in an hour. We'll do your thing and then enjoy your reception. That was Chairwoman Shelly Lubis I just got off the phone with. Before that was a conference call with Jamie Schwartz of the Environmental Defense Fund, Bryce Davis of the Sierra Club, and three Democratic Congressman from the Subcommittee on Energy and the Environment. The number of different words they had for "manipulative," Leo, there's no way they didn't have a thesaurus open in front of them. Bryce Davis said if I keep this up, he's going to encourage Seth Gillette in a thirdparty bid. I said for fifty bucks and a ride to the airport, Gillette could have the job right now. I politely reminded him that it's probably not a good idea to threaten the president.  I want to know when you're pushing me towards the missile shield it's not because you want me to look strong on defense. Would you tell Charlie I'm ready? Based on what? It's almost hard to believe that you're not on the National Security Council. John! Let me explain why you've been waiting. I have to see people in the order they arrive, and you got beat by Argentina. You also lost out on preferred seating for the State of the Union. Yes! Okay. Tom? Where are you on the missile shield? Leo? Well, it's a discussion for serious men. They say a statesman is a politician who's been dead for fifteen years. I'd like us to be statesmen while we're still alive. Lord Marbury, I accept your letter of credence from Queen Elizabeth, and, by affixing my signature and seal, do hereby declare you to be Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary. Let's go. TELEPLAY BY: AARON SORKIN STORY BY: ALLISON ABNER & DEE DEE MYERS DIRECTED BY: CHRISTOPHER MISIANO Where are we? Bob Novak just said this was the speech of my political life. You know how many times I’ve heard that? Do it. Good. Abbey’s already in her seat?  I said, my wife’s in her seat? Do it. Yeah. The Blue Ribbon... Yeah.  Yeah. Thanks.  Amen. Mr. Finney, would you tell the Speaker I’d like to see him please? ...continue to rise through every age... ...against every challenge, of people of great works and greater possibilities who have always, always found the wisdom and strength to come together as one nation; to widen the circle of opportunity, to deepen the meaning of our freedom, to form a more perfect union. Our best days lie ahead. God bless you and God bless the United States of America! To build this new future will demand boldly setting aside our partisan blinders and abandoning our ideological entrenchment.  fashion... ...boldly setting aside our partisan blinders and abandoning our ideological entrenchment. Therefore, I am asking the leaders of Congress and members of both parties to join me in establishing a Blue Ribbon National Commission to  fashion... ...me in establishing a Blue Ribbon National Commission... I challenge all our schools to teach character education. To teach values. To teach citizenship. If it means our kids will pay more attention to mathematics, and English literature, and history, and science, and the arts, and less attention to designer labels,  then our public schools should be able to require students to wear school uniforms. How’s it going? I heard.  Repay you for what?  I owe you money for that? I owe you anything for that?  Thank you. Don’t you already get paid?  Is there anything in particular you’d like me to say?  That’s really good. Yeah. What’s going on with the police officer? We’re going to get knocked off the story by a... What is? They can be identified as drug agents? Yeah, they may have blown their cover. Mickey, how do we know they’re still alive? And they kill our guys unless Santos releases Juan Aguilar from a prison in Bogotá. Why not? Robbie... How long? How many Frente casualties?  No. You think we’re headed for Vietnam? How? How long is it going to take Special Forces to mobilize?  Well then, I want our people to keep talking to Nelson Guerra. But in three hours I want to be ready to kick in the back door. Leo, I’d like the Senior Staff. Would you round them up?  I’ll be wandering the halls.  What’s up? I never even knew we HAD a nightclub down here. Yeah. Ainsley, I wanted to say hello and to you know... mention "a lot of people assumed you were hired because you’re a blonde, republican sex kitten" and well, they’re obviously wrong. Keep up the good work.  You know we’re meeting? Hey. They said you were in here.  Fellas... You’re mad at me. Abbey, so I indicated we were open to new ideas. How did I fail you this time? I have a meeting.   Things had to be cut. To make a 90 minute speech into an 80 minute speech things had to go. Abbey. Right now... Abbey.  That’s not what tonight’s... That was three years ago. I have Special Forces headed to Columbia on ready alert. They'll be ready for an order in a little less than three hours. The Frente took five DEA Agents in Putumayo... Yeah? I’ll be right there. Abbey... All right.  I’ve got to go. It was just three hours ago I gave the State of the Union. Can you believe that? I'm not allowed to smoke inside anymore. Up to the point where you accidentally burn holes in priceless antiques. Why? I smoke two cigarettes a day. For who... Russian spy satellites?  George Bernard Shaw says, "You don't live longer, it just seems longer." I'm not sure it was either.  Is it time? Where are we? Everyone sits. Tell me what happens when I give the order. What'll they do when they get there? Why? Nineteen guys are going to have to lie face down in the jungle until sunset? They're moving the hostages from where to where? Code name's Cassiopeia. Mickey, you look like you want to say something. Are we going to keep them alive longer, or is it just going to seem longer? I've been given reason to believe they'll be tortured at Villacerreno. They're U.S. drug agents. They know things these people want to know. Go. Yeah? This isn't cold. It's crisp. Well, you're a big wussie. It'll leave the Bishop open. Where? Abbey's pretty pissed at me. Pretty bad. You know I have this image in my mind of the dead soldiers coming back from Vietnam... the caskets coming off the plane. I don't know from where.  Caskets coming off the plane? Are they down? Where they'll wait. I'll see you in the morning. Hey. Thanks for having breakfast with me. Did you order something?  You want scrambled eggs? Could we get these guys some scrambled eggs? No, I'm fine. No! Bring them some food, would ya? You guys understand I can't discuss with you any rescue mission that may or may not be in play right now? Nelson Guerra wants me to tell President Santos to release Juan Aguilar from prison. I have a gun to my head and I'm not making that phone call. I inherited the war on drugs from a President, who inherited it from a President, who inherited it from a President before that. I'm not a hundred percent sure who we're fighting, but I know we're not winning. Ten years ago we spent $5 billion fighting drugs and we did such a good job that last year we spent $16 billion. Sixty percent of Federal prisoners are in jail on drug charges as opposed to two and a half percent that are there for violent crime. We imprison a higher percentage of our citizens than Russia did under Communism and South Africa under Apartheid. Somewhere between 50 and 85 percent of our prison population has a drug or alcohol abuse problem. We've tried "just say no." I don't think it's going to work.  I'm mentioning this because I'd like you to give me any thoughts you might have on the subject.  Hey.  What was that about? Packing already? You aren't leaving till tonight, right? Men and women are completely different in this regard. I don't know. I just had breakfast with Sam and Josh. Toby's having breakfast with Seth Gillette, who's every bit as pissed at me as you are. Abbey, can we... We didn't get a chance to talk again last night. Talk? Ever? Look... Why?   Yes and I'd like to go about my day without this black cloud around me so I'd like to talk now!  What are you, my Zen master? Can I be in charge of my own mind?!  I feel better already.  Hey. Is she here? Yeah. Where is she? Why? Why is she still in there? Why don't we get her out here? Ainsley, why don't come on out of there... How you doing? We met last night.  You were singing and dancing in a bathrobe. Why were you in the closet? They won't let me smoke inside but you can pee in Leo's closet. I appreciate you coming to work for me, Ainsley. You're an exceptionally bright young woman. Is your father proud of you? I bet he is.  Listen... What happened? Charlie, get the door. What happened? Did we lose the hostages? What are you talking about? What are you talking about?! No... How many guys were on the Blackhawk?  So I've got nine more guys now on the ground we've got to get back.  They're dead. I want the President of Colombia on the phone. I want a translator in this room right now.  How the hell did that happen?  YOU THINK!? We've never anticipated the possibility that somebody might try that?  IS THAT HOW I JUST LOST NINE GUYS TO A DAMN STREET GANG WITH A HAM RADIO!?  AMERICAN SOLDIERS!!! Where are the bodies? Where? Is somebody translating on the other end?  Mr. President, this is the President of the United States.  Mr. President, 90 minutes ago the United States invaded Colombian airspace. Two Blackhawk helicopters went into Tres Encinas with 20 Delta Commandos on intelligence that the hostages were being moved. One of the Blackhawks was shot down. They were nine military fatalities.  I'd like to ask for your assistance in confirming that the five hostages are still alive.  How do you know that?  Yes?  I'm not going to ask you, Miguel.  Say that again.  Well, I appreciate your making that offer but I don't think that's a very good idea.  Okay. Thank you, Mr. President. Juan Aguilar runs one of the largest drug cartels in the world. He has produced $15 billion worth of cocaine in two years. He's murdered or ordered the murder of eight Supreme Court justices, a pro-extradition Prime Minister and three Federal police officers in Bogotá. And from his prison cell I guarantee you he orchestrated the kidnapping of five U.S. DEA agents and the killing of their rescuers! I'm not letting him out.  I'll share a cell with him before I let him out. I want military options! Do we know where they are? What would it take to get them back? Yeah. What would it take to wipe them out? Yeah. What would it take?  Half?  You've really got to ask yourself what's the point in being a Super Power anymore.  And then there's the repack! First there's the preliminary, or the dry run. Then there's the actual packing.  Abbey, you're just going away for two days, right?  Right? It was an ambush. A guy with a shoulder thing shot down a Blackhawk. Everybody's dead.  Nine guys. Meanwhile, they've moved the hostages 60 miles into the jungle where we'd need a pair of tweezers to get them out.  No. No.  I didn't make the decision to run again. I wouldn't do that without you. When, Abbey? I didn't make the decision to run again! That's what we do, Abbey. We run for things! From the day a Congressman is sworn in he's got to raise $10,000 a week so he can get reelected! A President gets to govern for 18 months. We try to get people to vote for us and in the process we hope the people force us to do good things.  Yes, we had a deal.  Abbey... I've had one episode in two years.  I know what it's going to... Look...  Yeah. Have a good trip. Call me when you get there. I love you. Hey, Charlie. You shouldn't be out here without a coat. Yeah? No. Thanks. Hey! Let me tell you something, Leo...  After heroin and cocaine, tobacco is next. Leo, I can't possibly reverse our... I can't possibly reverse our position on negotiating... There were just 14 people in this room who heard Santos make me the offer. You know what Truman Capote said was the bad part about living outside the law? You no longer have the protection of it. What's to stop me? Two hundred CIA operatives... Black Ops. Two hundred guys with no wives, no kids, no parents.  I send 200 operatives down there. Monday morning I read in the paper Juan Aguilar is dead. What's to stop me? It was the Queen's Rook. That's why I couldn't trade the Bishop. It was over six moves ago. Arrange for their immediate release.  If they so much as experience turbulence on their way out... I want to go to Dover later tonight. Thank you. I'll call their families afterwards... They're trying to export their way out of their own economic problems. And by dumping low priced steel on the U.S., you know what they're asking for? They're begging for a protectionist response. Steel and mining employ a hundred and seventy thousand workers. They're not going to sit around while discount steel comes flying into... how you doing?  They're going to want retaliatory tariffs, and you know what that means? A return to Smoot-Hawley and the Great Depression. Leo, I'm walking over to the press and telling them that retaliatory tariffs are gonna cost American taxpayers 800,000 dollars for every job saved. What's going on? Eleanor? You mean Zoey. When did this happen? Why didn't you tell me six hours ago? Thank you.  I've had it, C.J. I've absolutely had it! What the hell is Danny Concannon doing calling my kids? He knows better than that! They all know better than that! But Danny... C.J., you're going to suspend his credentials for six months, and I don't give a damn. His paper wants to cover the President, they can send someone else. I was told it was Danny.  She called him? The Allman Brothers, Josh? Tokyo is willing to show economic restraint, in exchange for a good fielding shortstop and a left-handed reliever... Who's against us so far? Why Appropriations? Who's coming to her defense? Yeah? Yes, I understand I've been congratulated for denouncing a movie I've never heard of. I've got to hand it to you guys you've pulled off a political first. You've managed to win me the support of the Christian Right and the Cheech and Chong Fan Club in the same day. Anything else? Thank you. Charlie? Would you arrange for my middle daughter to come see me at her earliest possible convenience? Ah, screw her convenience. Get her ass down here. I was told my father wanted to see me? ...in consumer costs per job saved. Retaliatory tariffs on steel imports are a disaster. Anyone wants to check my math, they're more than welcome to. Anybody wants to shove the Golden Gate Bridge up Japan's ass, they're more than welcome to do that too. Oh...  Thank you. Ellie, thanks for coming. Come on in. Did you get down here okay? Did you take an airplane? A helicopter? That's because you go to school at Johns Hopkins, right? And Johns Hopkins is in Baltimore. I'm asking 'cause Baltimore is a 45-minute car ride from Washington, D.C. and we hardly see you anymore. So, I thought either you transfered to a different medical school, they moved Johns Hopkins, or they moved Baltimore. Are any of those things true? Okay. And this is accurate, right? This quote. "My father won't fire the Surgeon General. He would never do that." Eleanor, when you put your head down, your hair falls in your face, and I can't see your face, and I can't hear what you're saying. Now look at me, and talk to me! What the hell are you doing talking to a reporter?  Well, I'm sure before you gave the quote you cleared it with the Communications Office. I'm sure you went over the exact wording with C.J. Cregg and coordinated with White House strategy so that the timing was right in the news cycle. I'm certain you consulted the appropriate party leadership because you're a pretty knowledgeable operative having spent so much time with me. Ellie? What? WHAT? Pick your head up! There is politics involved in this, Ellie. And you knew it would make me unhappy and that's why you did it and that's cheap. Well, you sure didn't do it to make me happy! Okay, let's drop it. Mom gets back first thing in the morning, and we're running a movie tonight if you want to stay over. Yeah, thanks. That door over there.  Yeah. Send him in.  Charlie... Give me just a minute, would you? Good evening. I’m sorry about this. Is that your resignation? Thank you. Did you not think that playing down the dangers of drug use sent a dangerous signal as well? Millie, did you put her up to it? "My father won’t fire the Surgeon General, he would never do that." You didn’t put her up to it? You didn’t pick up the phone after Josh came to see you and say, "Ellie, it’s your godmother, let’s stick it to your old man, and paint him into a corner?"  Why haven’t I ever been able to get her to like me? I’m asking you. I’m asking you. I’m not. She’s mad at me. Yes, I am! I was running for President, where the hell was she? Not like Zoey and Liz. She’s always belonged to Abbey. No, I didn’t! How did I frighten her? I was elected two years ago, she’s 24 years old! It never seemed to intimidate Zoey or Liz. That’s not true. That’s not true. No, no, no. I will bear with the nonsense of the Christian right and the Hollywood left and the AFL-CIO and the AARP and the Canubus society and Japan, but I will not stand and allow someone to tell me that I love one of my children less than the others.  She’s frightened of me? I wanted to be so mad at her. I heard the news and my first thought was... My god, "King Lear" is a good play.  "My father won’t fire the Surgeon General, he would never do that." I wanted to be so mad at her. But the truth is, it’s the nicest thing she’s ever said about me. Good night. Hey, doc! I don’t accept. I don’t accept your resignation. These are the bigger things. I don’t accept your resignation.  You work for me. You go when I tell you to.  Yes, I know.  Yes, indeed. Tell C.J. when she gives Millie our support on Monday, she can mean it. You know, Josh, I think if you ever have a daughter, you’re going to discover there are worse reasons in the world to do something. Sit down, we’re coming to the good part.  How you doing? I said, how you doing? You know, we’re coming up to the good part. You want to bet me your tuition no one in this room is going to shush me? I hear you’re thinking about ophthalmology.  Why would you want to study people’s feet? Then what’s children’s medicine? I thought it was obstetrics. And what’s the study of feet? Hmmm?  The only thing you ever had to do to make me happy was come home at the end of the day. So, endocrinology would be what? Disorders of the gallbladder? I’m pretty sure you’re wrong about that, I think endocrinology is your sub-specialty of internal medicine, devoted to the digestive system. Are you sure it’s not nephrology, immunology, cardiology, or dermatology? Okay. Here comes the good part. I don’t really need to see the ten-year numbers. Have the ten-year projections ever been close to accurate? Within a trillion dollars. Okay. Bring me the ten-year projection, a Ouija board and a magic wand. What’s next? From whom? That name sounds familiar. Yes. I remember being locked in a steamer trunk. There were actual steamers in there with me, Charlie. I was in there with seafood. We lost the site. Why? Which says? What plaid flannel-wearing, cheese-eating, yahoo of a milkman governor signed that idiot bill into state law?  It was me, wasn’t it? Okay. Yeah, go ahead. No. No, don’t go ahead with the site. I just...  Tell my brother to hang on, would you? I’ll make a decision. I don’t know what the damn hurry is. Charlie? Let’s do calls in the residence, okay? I think there were a couple of late memos. Thanks. I’m going to head home. I’ll make calls from the residence. Yeah. Well, there’s this wooded land on the Connecticut River, but the Abenaki Indians are claiming it’s an ancient burial ground. There’s a magnificent bluff overlooking an orchard in Orford and the owner is willing, if not eager, to donate the land. The owner’s doing 40 months at Allenwood for securities fraud. This is how long I get before I have to start with the library? Two years? And the first six months was figuring out how to work the phones? Oh, by the way, they’ve changed the phones again. This is the last job I’ve ever going to have. This is the last time I’m going to come to work with people. I swear to God, I feel like I was just starting to get good at it. Not yet, okay? I’ll see you tomorrow. Leo. You busy? Come have dinner with me. Pierre Boileau is cooking tonight. You want to have dinner? That's your answer? Well, I can tell you that the man specializes in a reinterpretation of classic Provençale cuisine. Cassoulet, duck with green olives... ...saffron chicken... Well, don't you think you deserve one? His specialty is his dessert, tomate du saltambique. Passion fruit, kiwi and hazelnuts, and... Let's go. Leave the cell phone. We're not leaving the building. People can find you. What's he on to now? Oh, brother. Could Howard Stackhouse possibly be a bigger horse's patoot? He's a curmudgeon, a grouchy old crank. You are. I am full of mirth. He was all over me the first year. He called me, "Bartlet the Inert." I'm a reformer. I'm the most liberal President he's ever served under. His hero, Hubert Humphrey, once, you know... That's right.  I feel bad. His wife died a few years ago. I didn't go to the funeral. I was kind of busy running for President, Leo. Tomate du Saltambique, my friend. Hi. Hang on.  They thought I was going to be eating with Abbey, so... We'll just, you know, pretend there's no candlelight. Yeah. Leo, you have a deputy who's, frankly, a lot smarter than you are. Whatever it is, let him handle it. Who are you talking to? What did he say? Okay. Let's eat. Nah, I'm fine. No, she's up at the Manchester house. No, it really sucks, but thanks. Did you hear that? He said, "Very good, sir". Where do they learn that? Nothing. I just feel like we don't talk anymore. See you're not even listing. I'm just saying we work all day, and then the day's over, and we go out to dinner and you're still working, and you know, I'm sitting here. No time to talk. No, it's not.  I made... I made a deal with Abbey... 'cause of my thing.  My thing, by the way, is the reason that Hoynes stepped up on oil. Yeah.  Let's go. How does he not just tell me? How does he not come to me and say "Jed, this is my grandson and there are lots more like him and there are lots more to come. Can you help us out?" Damn it. He knows we would have gotten it done. Why doesn't he tell me? Nah, he's a crank. Hey. Hey Donna, you need something? C.J., that phone message was for real. He's not going to stop till he drops. C.J., let me tell you something. Don't ever, ever underestimate the will of a grandfather. We're mad men. We don't give a damn. We got here before you and they'll be here after. We'll make enemies, we'll break laws, we'll break bones but you will not mess with the grandchildren. C.J.... If I told you to screw the print deadline what would you want to do right now? Give him some dignity right? And give him a rest. The guy's going to collapse out there. Screw the print deadline. Leo? We will talk about the other thing later. Though it's not the worst idea in the world. I was in the House. I know nothing about Senate rules. What time is it? Let's wake up a parliamentarian. We're going to get one of them to walk in there. Charlie! I want to call Senators. We'll start with our friends. When we're done with those two, we'll go on to the other 98. There's no damn holiday for us either. C.J., no kidding, make this happen. Trust me just this once, you grouchy old son of a bitch. I closed the embassies in Tanzania and Brussels. I don’t have to make that call yet. About an hour. Why? Tell him what? What happened? Yeah... Come on! He... He scheduled a trip to New Hampshire? Yeah, thanks to who? To do what? You think Toby’s reaction is going to be the same as the public’s? Which will be?  The staff’s reaction will be what? What do I tell him? Go get him. Now it starts. Hey, Toby. You want a drink? Have a drink with me. Bourbon, no ice. You know what I just found out recently? To be called "bourbon," it has to come from Kentucky. Otherwise it’s called sour mash. An Algerian-born terrorist named Reda Nessam was arrested at the Canadian border yesterday with a U-Haul containing ten 2-ounce jars filled with nitroglycerin. No. Anyway, on advice from State and Intelligence, I closed the embassies in Tanzania and Brussels. They want me to order the airports, heighten security, but it’s a holiday weekend. I don’t know. Toby, I got to tell you something... Yeah. I don’t know. They do it... About an hour. Toby, around ten years ago, for a period of a few months, I was feeling run down and I had a pain in my leg. They both eventually subsided, but then eight years ago, the pain came back, as well as numbness. My vision would be blurry sometimes and I’d get dizzy. During an eye exam, the doctor detected abnormal pupil responses and ordered an MRI. The radiologist found plaque on my brain and spine. I have a relapsing-remitting course of MS. I have Multiple Sclerosis, Toby. I'm sorry? It's... I don't know... it's the good kind of MS. Yeah, as opposed to secondary progressive. Yeah. MS is a chronic disease of the central nervous system. Symptoms can be as mild as numbness or as severe as paralysis. Yeah. Yup. No. That's the good news. The bad news is there's no cure. Ever turn into secondary progressive? Sure. No. Yeah. Yeah.  The plural of surgeon general isn't surgeon generals, it's surgeons general. Like attorneys general, or courts martial. Nobody was asked to lie. That was Garreth from the FAA. Upon interrogating Reda Nessam, they believe it's possible that another rental car crossed the border yesterday. They believe it's headed to a safe house in Patterson, New Jersey, and the FBI thinks they can apprehend him in 24 hours. Of course, the only way all of this will happen is if Reda Nessam is telling the truth, so who wants odds? Anyway, they're still looking at forensic evidence and we're going to talk again in a few minutes to decide if there's a credible threat. I said, we're going to decide if there's a credible threat. Why? What are you guys talking about?  Hmm? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah? An episode.  I know. I can’t believe we’re all still here. The episode was over. Leo was with me. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs was with me as were the Secretaries of State and Defense. I’m sorry? I get injections of Betaseron. From a doctor. I think it would be best while temperatures are running a little high that you refer to my wife as Mrs. Bartlet or the First Lady. What you got, Leo? The FAA? Talk me through what heightened security means. They discontinue... Okay, they want a few minutes?  Toby’s concerned that the peaceful solution I brokered in Kashmir last year was the result of a drug-induced haze. I was elected, they were appointed.  The Vice President was elected. He has the constitutional authority to assume my... That’s because I never signed the letter, but I don’t think I got shot because I got MS. And the walls came tumbling down. I feel fine by the way. Thanks for asking.  No, Leo. Toby’s concern for my health is moving me in ways...  SHUT UP!  You know your indignation would be a lot more interesting to me if it weren’t quite so covered in crap!  Yeah.  Thanks.  Are you pissed because I didn’t say anything or are you pissed because there were 15 people who knew before you did? I feel fine by the way. Thanks for asking.  Yeah, this is the President.  Sorry about that. Charlie!  I’ve got to make the call. Let’s get Garreth back. The scanners they use take an hour to search the luggage of 250 passengers. The condition requires two photo IDs. Most people only have one. Delays. Delays are the downside. That timed out well.  I didn't know enough.  I have no intention of apologizing to you, Toby. ‘Cause you’re not the one with MS, a wife, three kids and airports to close. Not every part of me belongs to you. This was personal. I’m not willing to relinquish that right. Yeah. Well, that’s what usually brings on the episodes, but if you say so. I'm sorry? I don’t know.  It may have been unbelievably stupid. It may have been unthinkably stupid. I don’t know. I’m sorry. I really am. Yeah. I’ll see you tomorrow. Thanks. I couldn't disagree more, Cal. As long as these people are funding their public school districts with property taxes, neither the value of the schools nor the value of their property is going to go up. It's a vicious circle. It's terrible and it has to be stopped. I wouldn't go that far. Anything else? Thank you. It's a vicious circle, Leo. It never stops. It just goes round and round... ...and round and round. Now? We really need to see him now? Well... later. Five White House Counsels in two and a half years. Cochran, Gates, Solomon, Tribbey. Why can't I keep a head lawyer around here? I don't like new people. Never played chess, though, have we? See? Oh, like you're not. What is it with people from Chicago that they're so happy to have been born there? I meet so many people who can't wait to tell me they're from Chicago, and when I meet them, they're living anywhere but Chicago. He looks down his nose at me 'cause I'm not a lawyer. I didn't go to law school. I got a Ph.D. in economics instead. Yeah, and all that happened was I won a Nobel Prize and got elected President so I guess that decision didn't really pay off. Should I run back and get my Nobel Prize? Guy's been here three months he's got a nicer office than I do. That matters less to me. Hey, Oliver. What are the bags for? Oh... oh, gosh. Oliver, this... ...this can keep... The man's bags are packed. Where are you going? Asia's best-kept secret. It's really not even... I don't want you to worry that much about it.  I'm easing in. Well, Oliver, it really boils down to this I'm going to tell you a story and then I need you to tell me whether or not I've engaged 16 people in a massive criminal conspiracy to defraud the public in order to win a Presidential election. Not as much as a doctor. You should talk to a doctor. I think what you're asking is, is it possible I could be sitting in the Situation Room, have an attack, and nobody knows it. Yes. My vision might get blurry. You wouldn't know that. My legs might get numb... What's that?  What's he talking about? I don't want to be careful about what I say in this room. I want you. I meant, I don't need to be careful. Yeah. Have I ever been party to a lawsuit? I was governor of New Hampshire. Anybody who...  A meter reader slipped on a patch of black ice in my driveway and I got dragged into some pain-in-the-ass thing over my great-aunt's will. Yeah. Oliver, why are we talking about my great-aunt's will and the meter reader?  I never lied. No. No. I'm sorry? Yeah. Well, the Mexican economy crashed, an oil tanker busted up about 120 miles from here and 13 percent of Americans are living in poverty. So yeah, I can hang out with you and answer insulting questions for awhile. No. I have accidental death insurance as well as considerable personal worth. Were I to die, my family would not miss my government salary. I don't have any anymore. I'm the husband of a doctor and as a Governor and President, the various governments I've led generously... No. Yeah. Excuse me. Sit down. Don't be scared. My youngest daughter's got a big mouth. We won't discuss this any more for the time being. It'll be public soon enough. And the more conversations you have with me, the more lawyers you're gonna have to talk to, and they bill in an hour what you take home in a week, so we won't discuss it except to say this. You're gonna be subpoenaed. I'm confident in your loyalty to me. I'm confident in your love for me. If you lie to protect me, if you lie just once, if you lie just a little, if you lie 'cause you can't stand what's happening to me and the people making it happen, if you ever, ever lie... ...you're finished with me, you understand? Say you understand. Go back to work.  I need you to go to law school and graduate as soon as humanly possible. Well, I've got good news for you, Oliver. Turns out I didn't do everything right after all. Zoey had to fill out a family history form for Georgetown and because she was 17, a parent had to sign it. Yeah. I'd give anything if I had. It was Lady Macbeth.  There's a bad moon rising, Oliver. We both know it. They're gonna take me out for a walk. This isn't what you signed up for. Leo begged you to take this job. This isn't what you signed up for. If you leave, I'd appreciate it if you did it now, so it doesn't look like my lawyer bailed on me when the rain starts. No one's gonna hold it against you. I guess it depends. What would my first step be? Yeah. Yeah.  Bring it on. Hey. Welcome back. How was the flight? When Leo talked to you on the plane, he thought you already knew. And I’m saying, we still do this. We’re husband and wife and parents, and before we launch into palace intrigue, we do, "Welcome back. How was the flight?" One of the forms Zoey had to fill out for Georgetown asked for a family medical history. Did Leo tell you the rest? Zoey wasn’t 18 yet when she started. A parent had to sign the form. No, you did, Hot Pants. It’s gonna be okay. Look...  ‘Cause I didn’t! I talked to Zoey this morning. She’s gonna ace her finals. I hate Ellie’s boyfriend. I need you to speak to the White House Counsel, Abbey. Leo, how could you tell Abbey about the health form before I did? My wife and I are fighting battles on several fronts at the moment, including one with each other. Can you and I be men? Can we have a bond? How? I met Joey Lucas. How's he gonna feel about that? This is a bad idea. I'm coming clean, I'm doing it voluntarily. Anyone finds out, it's going to look like I did it because a poll told me to.  Why don't you get Sam? He talked to her on the phone? But he called her on the phone? Yeah, but I'm saying, did she hang up the phone, turn to her friends and say, 'You're never gonna believe why I'm getting on a plane?' What the hell is that?  Is this a joke? Where are we going? Why? You like the way it looks if we're meeting in the basement? Good evening. Yeah. Excuse me. How many people in this room know Kenny's last name? I believe this operation is no longer covert. Josh?  Go ahead. They may be right. Joey, is there any good news in there at all?  What happened last night? Yeah. Where is the president-elect? Sorry? And that's not the most troubling... Leo. At the moment, there is no Dessaline government; there is no Dessaline! And I just got done pulling nine dead bodies out of Colombia. Evacuate the non-essentials. Get some Marines at the Embassy. And somebody brief Fitzwallace! What? How do we know? What is Peter Bratt doing down there? In the trunk of his car? Did we evacuate the non-essentials? Let him in. Let him in! What happened? They boarded the plane? Leo... That wasn't supposed to happen! I evacuated the non-essentials specifically so that wouldn't happen! I gave the order six hours ago!  Six hours ago I gave the order! What the hell were they still doing on the runway?! We shot three men... We what? And I'm sure these guys had their handbooks with them! The plane is up in the air? What's happening on the ground? Who are we using? And what does Bazan want? On what charge? I'm sold. You're right, you know, I should be bringing them in on reelection. I should be talking to them. I don't want to make the same mistakes over again. Yeah. Let's start tonight. Around nine o'clock we'll meet in the residence. Bob Cratchit. Never... You bought a new car? And you paid sticker price. You need to look at the next page - subsection B, paragraph four, Mamie Yokum. Secret Service'd have you down like a calf at a rodeo.  "The definition of 'gift' excludes opportunities and benefits including favorable rates and commercial discounts available to the public at large." And?  Is the reason you didn't tell me you were getting a new car... you...? Did you think I was gonna think it was an extravagance? You don't think I think you should have a new car?  Delores, have you ever had a new car? How about you let me find out what you were supposed to pay and write you a check for the difference?  Is it a nice one? Smell? It's the smell of freedom... and the chemicals they treat the dashboard with. When are you picking it up? Do me a favor, would you? Come back here after you pick it up. I'd like to talk to you about something. And put the car in the driveway. I'd like to kick the tires.  It's an expression, Fannie Mae! Go get your car! Why? Jed!  Jed! Jed! Didn't you hear me calling you? Mr. Spence found this cigarette butt on the floor in the aisle of the chapel. Well, people shouldn't be smoking in the chapel, I think is my point, Jed. Do you understand what I'm saying? Could you tell your friends, please? Jed, hang on. I want you to meet someone. She's going to be taking over in my office for Mrs. Tillinghouse. Excuse me! This is Delores Landingham. Mrs. Landingham, this is my eldest son, Jed. Okay. Send Fitzwallace down. Anything else? They've been in there 48 hours. The guy's been President of his country for two days. He's spent them both at gunpoint. What do you know about this storm? It's moving from Florida to South Carolina. It's a tropical storm. No, I mean it's been designated a tropical storm. That means it has a surface wind speed of something. Isn't it strange to have a tropical storm in May? I'm pretty sure there's a season and this isn't it. I mean it's not a big deal. It's just that I'm pretty sure it's strange. You ever been to National Cathedral? You know you could lay the Washington Monument down on its side in that church? We should try it.  I need pallbearers. Excuse me. Keep going. Charlie. Do you have any idea why the door to the portico keeps swinging open? It's a little annoying.  But the door opens out.  No kidding! Charlie says there's a wind tunnel created by something. They're fixing the latch. Yeah? Okay. Well, we've got to go. I don't know what to say. Leo's pretty rich. Maybe he can buy some tech stocks and jack up the price. What did she say? The driver?  Yeah. The world'll rest easier. We're here. Yeah.  Yeah.  Yeah. Leo, would you do me a favor?  Would you ask the agents to seal the cathedral for a minute?  You're a son of a bitch, you know that? She bought her first new car and you hit her with a drunk driver. What, was that supposed to be funny? "You can't conceive, nor can I, the appalling strangeness of the mercy of God," says Graham Greene. I don't know who's ass he was kissing there 'cause I think you're just vindictive. What was Josh Lyman? A warning shot? That was my son. What did I ever do to yours but praise his glory and praise his name? There's a tropical storm that's gaining speed and power. They say we haven't had a storm this bad since you took out that tender ship of mine in the north Atlantic last year... 68 crew. You know what a tender ship does? Fixes the other ships. Doesn't even carry guns. Just goes around, fixes the other ships and delivers that mail. That's all it can do.  I've committed many sins. Have I displeased you, you feckless thug? 3.8 million new jobs, that wasn't good? Bailed out Mexico, increased foreign trade, 30 million new acres of land for conservation, put Mendoza on the bench, we're not fighting a war, I've raised three children...  That's not enough to buy me out of the doghouse? Haec credam a deo pio? A deo iusto? A deo scito? Cruciatus in crucem! Tuus in terra servus nuntius fui officium perfeci.  Eas in crucem!  You get Hoynes! Yeah. I'm fine. Yeah. Yeah. ...A couple of years ago, I began experiencing blurred vision and numbness in my legs. Two years and many tests later... ...I was diagnosed with a course of relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis. Yeah! Yeah. How are you? That was the easy part.  Talk about the weather. And there's a tropical storm seizing, right? Okay, and how many times say, in the last hundred years, has a tropical storm come off the Atlantic seaboard to Washington in the middle of May? At all? Yeah. Thanks, Donna. According to the NOAA, the storm is a non-recurring phenomenon, which is science's term for 'we don't know what in the world is going on, but we're stocking up on canned goods.' Is this stuff you don't think I'd remember from an hour ago? Why? Okay. Okay.  Yeah? C.J.... Front row, first seat on the right. My right. Young Jed is knocking on his father's office door - once, twice, three times. Come in.  "If you hide your ignorance, no one will hit you and you'll never learn." Is this your quote? Is this your quote? "If you hide your ignorance, no one will hit you and you'll never learn." And you quoted Ray Bradbury? In an article you and your friends wrote, condemning professor Loomis. He is a professor of literature. Yes. Stop it right now. You're a guest at this school. Jed! Was that supposed to be funny? That wordplay you just did there, was that meant to be funny? Was there anything else? Don't start with this.  You're the only one who seems to mind the service. You're Catholic because your mother is, and you're at the school because I'm the headmaster. How's that for clever with words?  But what was it you came in here to talk to me about? Please close the door behind you. Ah... Damn it! Mrs. Landingham!  The door keeps blowing open. I was... It's not that I don't know how to use it, it's just that I haven't learned yet. I have M.S., and I didn't tell anybody. You're gonna make jokes?  The party's not going to want me to run. I've got a secret for you, Mrs. Landingham. I've never been the most popular guy in the Democratic Party. Give me numbers. How about a child born this minute has a one in five chance of being born into poverty? 44 million. Homicide. Three million. Five million. That's 13 million American children. Three and a half million kids go to schools that are literally falling apart. We need 127 billion in school construction, and we need it today! Yes. Yes, Sandy. I'm sorry, Sandy, there was a bit of noise there, could you repeat the question? Hello...  What the hell's going on? Ah... Please... You women seem bright and lovely. The men? Disturbingly dense. Excuse me...  Weren't you coming down to get me some apples and peanut butter?  So, we're stuck here, huh? Well, I live here.  I'm going back to my office. Nice meeting you all.  Yeah?  I try to be.  A martyr would rather suffer death at the hands of an oppressor than renounce his beliefs. Killing yourself and innocent people to make a point is sick, twisted, brutal, dumb-ass murder. And let me leave you with this thought before I go searching for the apples that were rightfully mine: we don't need martyrs right now. We need heroes. A hero would die for his country but he'd much rather live for it... It was good meeting you all. Yes, Sandy. I'm sorry, Sandy, there was a little bit of noise there, can you repeat the question?  Yeah. And I'm going to win. Bruno! Give it to Leo. Yeah. And I'm going to win. Abbey? Listen. Look... That's funny, 'cause that's sort of what I did. I don't.  I don't, I swear. Yeah? Are you going... Abbey... I'm running again, Abbey. Look, I have a lot to say... What? No, I have to go down, they're going to brief me on the evacuation plan for Haiti. You'll be up later? Probably three or four. Not usually.  What are you all looking at? What do you guys think the news is going to lead with tomorrow?  Yeah.  Good evening! Yeah. So these helicopters land on the roof, and then... What are the possibilities there'll be Haitian civilian casualties? How long do I have? OK. Thank you. Yeah. We're talking about a display of force? And what is he up against? It picks up weapons signals?  Peter, State's exploring the effectiveness of immediate sanctions? We'll have a refugee crisis.  All right, let's go here. Nancy, Peter, get a message to the Canadian prime minister - we intend to restore Dessaline. The Canadians should tell Bazan if he doesn't move out we're willing to move forward with military options. In the mean time, I'm willing to consider a fly-by. Now you're just bugging me.  That's all. Yeah? That it was politically motivated. You think it's a sign of strength to invade Haiti? Missouri could invade Haiti. Sanctions aren't going to work - you said it yourself. The Haitian National Police will get rich of the contraband. Dessaline was democratically elected and instead of sitting in his office he's sitting on the USS Enterprise. To say nothing of the fact that they shot at us, and you don't get to do that. I'm late. A black Lincoln drives up a long gravel driveway which is flanked by a wooden fence and some trees. Several black SUVs and a few cars are parked along the side of the drive. A large white house is barely visible in the distance. The car stops at a guardhouse. Leo is sitting in the backseat, with the window rolled down. Bartlet is leaning on the back of an old red pickup, wearing jeans and a polo shirt, drinking coffee and smoking. He catches sight of Leo's car. Several barns and out buildings, as well as farm equipment are visible off to the side. A cow moos in the background. Leo's driver pulls the car up close to where Bartlet is standing. Leo gets out of the car and walks over toward Bartlet as someone walks two horses up toward the house. Leo is wearing khakis and a casual suit jacket. Awasiwi Odanack. It's a Abenaki phrase that means...  ..."beyond the village." You want coffee? What's happening? When? Yeah, all right. Why?  Yeah, no, I mean, why? It'll get wrapped up in one news cycle. I don't give a... Screw it, and screw anybody who writes that story.  You have a hunch? Of course the first round of subpoenas'll be handed down this week. If we announce in two weeks, that's when the first round of subpoenas will be handed down!  Screw it! It's game time. Let's go! Yeah.  How's everybody doing?  What about C.J.? All right.  Laryngitis? We could just say I have MS. Leo? I'm running for reelection, and I'm gonna win. Bartlet and his staff are in the barn practicing a speech.  We are more than a set of borders. We are bounded by the reach of human freedom. We have mastered every moment. We have vanquished every foe. We are strong. We are prosperous. We are at peace with the world. We are, as we have ever been, the envy of every civilization. We are, as we have ever been, the hope of all mankind. But I am not satisfied. Indeed, I am restless. And I come before not to speak of the America we have, but of the Amer.... Yeah? Okay. (reading) "But I am not satisfied. Indeed, I am restless. And I come before you not to speak of the America we have, but of the better, stronger, more prosperous America we can create together." It's a garter snake. Don't worry about it. (reading) "I seek re-election to the presidency, not because of its glories, but because of its challenges..." Yeah? All right. We'll revisit that. (reading) "A presidential candidate owes his campaign no less than he owes his country; everything he has, everything he can give, all his hope... Yeah? (joking) Does somebody her have M.S. and they haven't said anything? (reading) "But I am not satisfied." Indeed, Leo, I am close to taking my own life with a wheat thresher. "And so with pride and purpose, I hereby announce my candidacy for the presidency of the United States."  I didn't see you there... I didn't see you. Peter thinks sanctions are a waste of time and I agree. In about half an hour we're buzzing the island with... uh, what they call an Alpha strike formation - to show Bazan... I don't know.  Yeah?  Sorry, I said I don't know, we'll see. Yeah, it was bound to happen.  Yeah? Yeah. Ah, it's Leo's call.  Yeah, it's Leo's call. Look, I'm sorry, I can't get into our thing tonight. I do, that's why I can't get into it. I have to read. All right, I'm going to the study.   Abbey, you were lying down when I came in. I didn't see you. A car pulls up to the farm. C.J. gets out and approaches Abbey. It's not a surrender if he has demands. What does he want? What else? Where?! Well, that's a bit of a dilemma. Does anybody have room at their place for Bazan and sixty of his relatives? Yeah. I want to handle this peacefully and right now. Nancy, what do you think of Venezuela? Tell them I'll give the SPR strong consideration. Mike, have the Canadians get a message through: we'll unfreeze his US accounts but he can't remove any money from Haiti. Only his wife, his children and his parents can seek asylum. If he tries to go back, he'll be under arrest. Tell me when it's done. The State Department's suggesting that we praise the French government for their help in resolving this matter. I would, but I'm worried they'd surrender. When do you think C.J. can brief? Yeah? Leo is reading some papers, and Doug, Toby and Sam can be seen two rooms back, arguing.  Bruno! I understand you're going to be working with us. You have one or two demands. You want 12 percent of the ad buys. A room, a car, and a driver, that's no problem. No. I'm sorry, Bruno. Leo runs the show. It's a deal breaker. Can you help us out? I've never been nervous talking in front of big crowds. It's talking to one person...  I didn't know you were going to be here. I thought Leo was gonna... Okay. No, I think it's a good idea. I don't know enough about agriculture. Yeah, well, agriculture is responsible for one in five American jobs, so it is a little bit my field. 15 percent of the world's cotton, 25 percent of the world's beef, and 50 percent of the world's soybeans are grown in my field; farmers and ranchers pay taxes in my field, their kids go to school in my field, they go to jail in my field. From time to time they go to war in my field. So when I say 'it's not my field,' I'm not saying something, I'm trying to learn so I can. Why aren't you with me? You're not. I'm trying to read here. Abbey... Look...  Can I go a week without explaining myself? Sit down, we'll talk about it right now.  Isn't there any way I could change your mind, 'cause I really had my heart set on it. Yeah. C.J. wants her to introduce me. I wouldn't mind a little... you know. There's gonna be a big crowd here tomorrow. I need to finish the speech. Sam is near a fence. Connie drives up in her car. C.J. drives up to the guard station near the house. A police car drives past her in the opposite direction. There's a black SUV pulled up on the front lawn and a couple of security officers milling about. Bartlet is standing at his lectern and scribbling notes on his speech. C.J. pulls up next to the entrance, gets out of her car, and walks into the barn. She stands near the door, keeping some distance. Even though he must have heard the car door close, he doesn't look up. Come in. Yeah. Don't be a marriage counselor. It pisses me off. Okay? You know what I'm talking about. That part of my life doesn't belong to you. All right. That's all. I'll see you out there. (looks up) Yeah? Yeah, okay. (sternly, raising his voice) That's nonsense to me and I don't care! (yelling, gesturing) For all the new jobs we've created, there are single mothers working two of them at minimum wage. There are school districts where less than half the students graduate. And a kid born in Harlem is more likely to go to prison than a four-year college! They're bringing guns to school, C.J.! (gently) I was never supposed to win. I got in it polling in the single digits. Hoynes had it locked up. I got in it to give some speeches and keep him honest... ...then you guys came along and all of a sudden I got 22% in Iowa and then South Carolina and Michigan and... then Illinois. (shakes his head) It was a mistake benching you for that last press conference. (softly) I need you, too. Bartlet and Abbey are sitting in the back seat, silent, looking out the windows. Bartlet sighs deeply. Did you know that hardly any of the guys who landed on the moon are married to the same people they were married to before they went there? I'm just saying it could be worse. I could've been an astronaut. I'd have been a great astronaut. I'd have overcome it to go to the moon. (pauses to look at her) I'm really happy you're introducing me. I'm really happy about that.Neither one of them says anything for a few moments. Say it. They can look it up! It's not our job to appeal to the lowest common denominator, Doug. It's our job to raise it. If you're going to be the "Education President," it'd be nice not to hide that you have an education. Bruno, would you mind? Churchill and FDR: serious men using big words for big purpose. It occurs to me, I never said "I'm sorry." (pause) I am. (pause) For the lawyers, for the press, for the mess, for the fear. Bruno, Doug, Connie: these guys are good. They want to win. So do we. The only thing we want more is to be right. I wonder if you can't do both. The staff are all standing very still, listening intently to his words. There's a new book, and we're gonna write it. You can win if you run a smart, disciplined campaign, if you studiously say nothing -- nothing that causes you trouble, nothing that's a gaffe, nothing that shows you might think the wrong thing, nothing that shows you think. But it just isn't worthy of us, is it, Toby? It isn't worthy of us, it isn't worthy of America, it isn't worthy of a great nation. We're gonna write a new book, right here, right now. This very moment. Today. You know what? Break's over. Charlie! Are we out of pens? That’s a good pen, I need an everyday pen. You’ve got crappy pens, with a plastic top. I need a solid pen that feels good in my hand, but it’s not so formal I feel like a dandy. I used to have the perfect pens. Every day right here, in my pocket. I loved those pens! Balance, great action, paper soaked up the ink what the hell happened to those pens? Do they not make them anymore? I kept that company in business. You know, I just haven’t gotten to it. It’s just been busy. Is there a rush on this?  I have five secretaries, to say nothing of the Secretaries of State, Defense, Treasury, and Education. Yeah? Things have been fine. I’m gonna have dinner and I’ll be back in the office after, okay? Are you having dinner? I’ll see you later   Yeah. Charlie. I'm expecting a call from Bill Horton and I left the National Fire Plan in the dining room. Thanks. The governor of Wyoming was an inch an a half away from calling me a pyromaniac tonight. I'm saying somewhere out there is a registered voter who's thinking, 'You know, I thought I really liked this Bartlet fellow, but now that I see he's in favor of fire...' It's the end of the season and the fire isn't anywhere near tourists. Letting this fire burn is good for the environment. You know how I know? Because smart people told me. Please god, Leo, let them be right. Any minute. Yeah. So it's starting to close in on the boundary?  Yeah, but we're gonna make sure he looks like an idiot, too, right?  Wyoming is just going to have to have some faith that the Department of the Interior knows what it’s doing. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. Josh. A ballerina? We'll go with that for now.  Really?  You like this? I thought you don't oppose a tax cut in an election year?  I’ll say. Actually, you stamp it, then sign it. It doesn't matter if most voters don't benefit. They all believe that someday they will. That's the problem with the American dream. It makes everyone concerned for the day they're gonna be rich... The governors of Wyoming, Idaho, Montana, and Utah, along with the Senate Majority Leader and Speaker of the House, are calling me a "fringe" environmentalist, 'cause I'm listening to the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture, along with the U.S. Forest Service, the Chief Ranger, and the Parks Superintendent. They say letting the fire burn is good for the environment. And I'm betting on a weather report, of all things. It's just one of those times. There was a reason they had to cancel. What do you think they're gonna be talking about? They could have left after the entree. They're gonna miss hot pumpkin soup with a cheese gnocchi and a chevre brioche. That's a pretty big price to pay just to override my veto. What are you saying? Leo... So I'd think twice about vetoing. And now? Where is this thing? You know what we're starting with tonight? Hot pumpkin soup with a cheese gnocchi and a chevre brioche. It's on its way. I say they could've waited until after the entree. Sometimes it's like I don't even need to be here. C.J., you look very nice. Mullis? Is it here? Okay. Hey. What's your name? They wouldn't. What do you got in the box, Mr. Dolan? If the House successfully overrides the veto, we are weak. NaCl, C.J. Table salt.  Send it back.  Have the parents been notified? Has anyone claimed responsibility? Nancy, hasn't State issued travel warnings since Bekaa? The Americans were targeted? We know this? Yeah? You think there's an Afghan connection? How long? I'm going to want some temperature-cooling options. Agency and FBI concur? And we shouldn't be looking outside the box? Retaliation for Bekaa? If that's the case I want to hear it from Arafat's mouth. I want to hear it from him. A denunciation of violence. I want to see security cooperation with the Israelis. Would you? Hey. How you feeling? It's all right. Yeah, you're pretty gross. It's good... but... a suicide bomber got two American kids in Jerusalem. Yeah. We're pretty sure. We got some things going. 19 and 21. They were brothers. You speak to Zoey today? I thought the deal was she calls once a day. I want her to call every day. All right. You need anything? Okay. How? So you think I get on the phone with the Chairman and... It's gonna take more than that. Congress? We'll withhold the $100 million in NGO aid if they don't hand him over? And you think handing him over puts the pin back in the grenade? For a day?  All right. Set up the call. This guy at the dinner, he told me something I didn't know. On Yom Kippur, you ask forgiveness for sins against God. But on the day before, you ask forgiveness for sins against people.  Did you know that?  You can't ask forgiveness of God until you've asked forgiveness of people on the day before.  Yeah? Yeah, I'm gonna do this alone. Have a good night, everybody.  Mr. and Mrs. Levy, this is Jed Bartlet. I have three children. I really don't know what to say.  It sucked. It sucked! Oh, like I'm not already going to hell. It did lack penache. Yeah. She's skipping over the part that says, "Wives, be subject to your husbands as to the Lord, for a husband is the head of a wife as Christ is the head of the church." Why? Okay.  "In splendor." And I have no problem with Ephesians. And any time you want me to cleanse you with the washing of water, you know I'm up for it. Hackery! This guy was a hack! He had a captive audience! And the way I know that is that I tried to tunnel out of there several times. He had an audience and he didn't know what to do with it. Couldn't have hurt. Words... Words, when spoken out loud for the sake of performance, are music. They have rhythm, and pitch, and timbre, and volume. These are the properties of music, and music has the ability to find us and move us, and lift us up in ways that literal meanings can't. Do you see? Yes, I am. And God loves me for it. For other stuff, not for this. You can't just trod out Ephesians, which he blew, by the way, it has nothing with husbands and wives, it's all of us. Saint Paul begins the passage: "Be subject to one another out of reverence to Christ."  "Be subject to one another." In this day and age of 24-hour cable crap, devoted to feeding the voyeuristic gluttony of the American public, hooked on a bad soap opera that's passing itself off as important, don't you think you might be able to find some relevance in verse 21? How do end the cycle? Be subject to one another! No, it's not about me! Well, yes, it is about me, but tomorrow it'll be about somebody else. We'll watch Larry King and see who.  All hacks, off the stage! Right now! That's a national security order. How does Mrs. Sinatra feel about that?  You make me egg foo yung...  You make me feel there are songs to be sung...  Yeah, okay. Ah, damn. Charlie, can I see Leo? Yeah. Okay.  When do you think I should go in there? You'll talk to the sheriff's office and... I guess the DA. Yeah. You heard? C.J. thinks I should wait a few hours. Yeah. Be subject to one another, Leo. What can I do to be of subject to you? Yeah? Okay. He's not going to want to do it. What are you doing today? What about? Keep me out of it, all right? You think I should send Hoynes to Texas? All right, get him over here. Yeah. Charlie! You took Indianapolis? You didn't want to take Kansas City over Arizona? Kansas City's got three players out of Notre Dame. You always go with the team who's got the most players out of Notre Dame. What's your system? That's a little simplistic, isn't it? Yeah? Thank you. Hey, John. Do you know this church? The United Baptists Church in Abilene? Listen, you feel like having a beer with me? On Sundays, when we got back from church, my father would let my brother and me split a beer. It got to be a habit. Nancy?  Nancy, could I get a cold beer and some ice water? And close the door please.  Nancy does what she was told. It's what Texans do.  The NRA systematically worked the legislatures to weaken conceal-and-carry laws, the effect of which is to increase gun sales and pad its own membership. The National Conference on State Legislatures is meeting this weekend at the Convention Center in San Antonio. Yeah.  It's also what Vice Presidents do.Nancy comes in and serves them beer and water. Thank you, Nancy. John... And if you look at the state of New Jersey, which has a "may issue" law-if you look at changing that one word... Changing that one word means law enforcement can decide who gets a concealed weapon and when and where they can carry it. Texas has a "may issue" law in front of a legislature right now, and you going down there... It's counter-scheduling. You go in front of an unfriendly audience. You tell them something they don't want to hear-it shows you have courage. You're a hero in Texas. Texans don't like that you have the courage of your convictions?  Oh, yeah. I forgot. That's not good enough. A tradition that's passed on from father to son? We tamed the frontier, John. We did that already. Let them stand in this room and say that. On this day. Let them stand in this room. I like it?! She was nine years old! Green Bay lost.  She was nine years old. Well... that is an excellent point. I never saw it that way. Tighter ax control. She didn't... You know what? Last year, gun deaths? 30,708. Alcohol deaths? 35,450. Tobacco deaths? 400,000. Marijuana deaths? Zero. This guy, the second shooter-Rambo? He's gonna get nothing. He's gonna get a parade. You know why? There was no sign posted in the church saying you can't carry a concealed weapon.  I'm just playing devil's advocate. She was nine years old. Can I ask you a question, just out of curiosity? If guns are meant to deter the threat of crime, what's the point of concealing them? I mean, wouldn't you want the criminal to see that you've got a gun? Then what's the answer to that? You don't know? We can't all just agree it's a stupid-ass amendment that was written before there were street lamps, much less police forces, and move on? There's no need for a citizen militia. Then say so. Only 16% believe gun ownership is an absolute right. Only 9% believe it's an absolute wrong. There's a middle. We can win them! Which we wouldn't have been doing if... Nothing.  You outed me, John. With that trip to Nashua, with the oil companies. You wanted people to start asking questions.  So did my wife. Look... Yes, it was. It's not easy being my Vice President, is it? I wouldn't think so.  But it's the only way you're gonna get the nomination. You know that, right? If I win. Yeah. You'll go to Texas? Yeah. Yeah? Thank you. No. The propellers aren't going. They know I want to leave now? The propellers aren't going. That makes sense. Also, there's a chance I could get hit getting on or off. Excuse me? You think I'm not tall enough to get hit in the neck by the propellers on Marine One? I duck when I get on that helicopter, and you should, too. It's just good safety sense. They know I want to leave now? Filing day, Charlie. Last to get on the ballot in New Hampshire.  I'm going myself. Or, I could send an aide. I'm going myself. Always have, always will. Fair enough. Always have, never will. But I'm going myself. You know why? It's a profound statement about democracy. Are you mocking me? The thing before wasn't a crack about my height? Yes, I am. I'm going myself. It's not a problem. I'm up, I'm back. The whole thing takes two hours. I do love doing this. It's one of my all time favorite... Why not? What is it? Yeah. Right. What does "we don't have it" mean? We don't have it? And they're in North Korea?  Yeah. I think I'll go ahead and cancel that trip, Leo. If only to stick around to see how this sounds worse than it really is. I think you will. Where's the damn submarine, Nancy? I don't want to hear I don't know, I want to hear how many people are out there swimming around looking for it. Shut up. How long can the crew survive down there? Yes. How close are these guys to landfall?  Four thousand yards? They get that close?  Four thousand yards? Can they send a distress signal? They would wait to send a distress signal and risk their lives? Well, that's great. I assess the national interest by the number of people alive, not dead. You have four hours before I order the Pacific Fleet into Haeju Bay. I agree. Is Peter still recovering? All right. We'll talk to someone else. Someone we trust. Anybody but... Anybody but him. Why? So does Peter.  Was it... I don't... Was it major heart surgery? He's gonna scold me. He's been at the State Department since Truman. He thinks I'm a kid and that he outranks me. I've gotta tell him I lost a submarine. Can I make something up, like "say, a friend of mine hypothetically..." Bring a copy of the constitution. I'm gonna show him I'm not scared. Hey, Bruno, can you devise a campaign strategy that involves beating the crap out of Leo? Every single election... Legislature, house, governor. President. Is he here? Okay. It's a profound statement about democracy. Good morning, Albie. Can I get you anything? Coffee? Soft drink? Okay. Okay. I've asked you here, Albie, because you're the assistant Secretary of State and I, of course, am the President. See, right away... Lake George. Thanks, Albie. That much, the National Security Council has made clear to me. And if they were in trouble, you see, they wouldn't send a distress signal 'cause they might be detected and submariners have a different set of criteria when assessing risk versus reward. Okay, I'll just stand over there. Cause for war. Little thing called Latin. Albie, if we tell North Korea we've violated their waters it could be interpreted as an act of war? We tell 'em it's not. Okay.  Can I talk to you alone for a second? Let's not call North Korea just yet. Leo. Gut feeling. Has the boat gone quiet? All right. Three more hours. Who? Also, he'd be good to have around for morale, 'cause he's Mr. Happy Fun Guy. Albie. I'm gonna ask you to stay around for a while. Charlie! Charlie, could you have someone bring some Schweppes' Bitter Lemon and the Constitutional Order of Succession, please? Oh, God, I'm sorry, am I still here? I haven't lost the boat yet, Mr. Secretary, and I happen to be the only one in the building who thinks we should be sending the fast attack subs right now. And I'm an hour from gathering the NSC and calling Japan. Leo... There was a UN action, Mr. Secretary. Sixteen countries were involved in that police action, Mr. Secretary. Thirty-three, thirty-four thousand American dead. How come we're the only ones still fighting? Where did everybody go? Yeah. Send him in. Hey, Josh. No, give it to me now. I want a distraction. Give it to me. That's okay. The question?  I don't. Good. Leo. Okay. It's time. Yeah. We're going now. What happened? Did you contact Pac fleet? And San Diego, right? Tell me what they do. Whiskey Three? How many trips will it take? What about injured? Let's go get 'em. Time's up. What? What does that mean? What does that mean? All right, okay. There they are. See, they went deep and quiet to avoid a close-aboard with a Luna class destroyer. What you gotta do in these situations is you trust the captain, you trust the crew. Hey. It got filed? It got filed? So I'm on the ballot in New Hampshire. Okay.  When Romans ran for the office of Counsel - did I just see you roll your eyes? They wore whitened togas to show their intent - a bit silly, perhaps... But it was an act of personal commission. What? You're pretty mouthy today. Hey. Hey. Do you duck when you're getting on Marine One? Okay. I think the blades are high enough. I heard. Yeah, listen. I want you to go easy on him. He's a conscientious and dedicated guy. It's not an easy question. Why do I want to be President?  I've been thinking about it for the last couple of hours. I almost had it. I'm not wild about Camp David. I'm not the only one, either. Bess Truman didn't like it. I read that somewhere. She thought it was dull.  But there I go, Thanksgiving at Camp David.  It's not a place you go at Thanksgiving, not when you have a farm. No. What makes you think it's a farm? Farms have things you can grow, and animals. I want you to learn more about farms. Yeah. Doesn't matter. Thanksgiving's where your family is, and this year my family's at Camp David. Why, I do not know. Abbey didn't wanna schlepp to New Hampshire. Schlepping in a 747. It's not like we were gonna have to carry our own bags or anything, but I do not argue. Were we talking about something?  You know that line you're not supposed to cross with the President? No-no. Look behind you. Would you like to leave? Damn right, with my permission.  It's the brine that keeps the meat soft, lady. You soak it overnight in water, salt, sugar... Seventeen kinds of spices including? Now you can go. Bess Truman didn't like Camp David, either, she thought it was dull. Doesn't matter. Long as you've got an oven, and you go to three hundred and twenty degrees. You take your turkey, which has been soaking overnight in water, salt, coriander... She was asking me. Yeah. Hey. This is some sort of pre-emptive psychological thing? That's not going to work. I saw the message calendar. I'm having some difficulty navigating the color-coding. Well, there should be a separate color for things I don't care about. Providing low-cost cell phone service to neighborhood watch groups. Really? There's nothing wrong with the policy, it's just too small. I could fund this initiative out of my pocket. Leo could fund it out of his pocket. Shouldn't this be local government, like the YMCA or something? We pass minute, but easy to understand. How popular? Get out of here. Bring me that polling data. Cornbread, oysters, water chestnuts, andouille sausage. Inside. It'll cook. It'll cook. I've got it covered. Anything else? I know they're coming out. What's it going to look like? Fewer. ...carroway seeds, thyme, cornbread, oysters, water chestnuts and Handui sausage. Yeah. But Toby seemed to indicate that you have to be careful if you cook it inside the turkey, because in some cases it doesn't cook, and when that happens, people get sick. You know about this?  'Cause I thought Toby might be playing with me. But you said you've heard of it. Nah, you don't have that kind of wit. I need to talk to an expert. I can't ask Rene. No. No, I can't. Thanks Margaret. I can't ask Rene right now. Well, frankly, I thought he did something stupid and inconsiderate last week, but it turns out I was just in a bad mood. Yes. And while he didn't deserve it, he will someday soon. 82 percent are in favor of fixing potholes? I'm gonna look at this. They want the nickel and dime stuff, I'll tell you one thing we can do. This time of the year there should be a hotline you can call with questions about cooking turkey. A special 800 number where the phones are staffed by experts. What do you mean?  Butterball has a hotline? Are you kidding me? God, I'm sorry, I love my country. Charlie, get me the number for the Butterball hotline. Hang on. I don't think this is the right one. Yeah, this is something different. Hang on a second. This is--  Find Bruno Gianelli, tell him I wanna see him right away. Get him in here. What the hell is this?  What is this?  It's a poll. I asked to see a poll about certain... doesn't matter. Then send up the wrong poll. This one asks voters where I should spend Thanksgiving. What the hell are you doing polling where I should spend Thanksgiving? I have Thanksgiving with my family. Thank god! You politicize family to make sure they don't look political. My family is off limits.  I'll decide when I've used them up. You don't poll where my family goes, am I making myself clear? What? Ah, something important! The number for the Butterball Hotline.  Watch, and learn. Hello... Charlie!! Toby! Come in, please. You polled where I should have Thanksgiving? And it was okay with you? Why? You think people should care where I have Thanksgiving? All right. Doesn't matter. I straightened it out. It has a lot to do with kelp. Shhhh. Hello!! Well, first let me say, I think this is a wonderful service you provide. I'm a citizen.  I'm Joe Betherson...sen. That's one 't', and with an 'h' in there. Fargo.  My street address is 114... 54 Pruder Street, and it's very important that you put 'street' down there because sometimes it gets confused with Pruder Way and Pruder Lane. Apartment 23 R... Fargo, North Dakota... Zip code 50504. I do radio commercials for... products.  Stuffing should be stuffed inside the turkey, am I correct? Well, then we'd have to call it something else, wouldn't we?Toby sits down and puts his hand under his chin. If I cook it inside the turkey, is there a chance I could kill my guests? I'm not saying that's necessarily a deal-breaker. All right. Well, first of all, I think you made the second bacteria up, and second of all, how do I avoid it? Excellent! Let's talk temperature. No, see, I was testing you! The USDA calls for turkeys to be cooked to an internal temperature of 180 to 185 degrees. Okay. Good testing! Oh yeah. It was presented to me as a gift from the personal sous chef to the king of...  auto sales in... Fargo. Phil Baharnd. The man can sell a car like... well, like anything. And you do, too. Thanks a lot!  That was excellent! We should do that once a week. I gotta get better at the names. No. One more thing left. Today, we find the traitor in my family. I know the First Lady doesn't like to schlep, but would you please tell her to meet me in the residence? Hi. Yeah, sorry about that. Listen, I'm sorry about this, too, but we have to change plans. We're gonna have dinner here at the White House. Charlie's calling everybody.  I guess not. It's no problem. It's their job. I've got polling numbers.  J'accuse, mon petite fromage! Nothing's wrong with my French.  That's right! And what part are you leaving out now? Yes!  You know what? It was. Well, with the ingredients for stuffing, you have to cook them before you put them in the turkey, and you're not gonna know whether I did or not. Me, too.  Toby! Come with me for a second, would you? No problem. Are you straightening things out with the Smithsonian? I'm supposed to speak at the opening of an exhibit marking the sixtieth anniversary of Pearl Harbor, but there's a small veterans' group that objects to the exhibit on the grounds that it's America bashing. Frank, what was added? Yeah The point is that we've dotted the I's and we're ready to announce. Let C.J. know but have her pass it off to the DoD. Not totally. I don't know, every time we make one of these deals with a place like Qumar I feel the women around here look at me funny. You think it's just guilt? Well how should I deal with guilt?  Yeah, okay. C.J.'s going to be cool with this, right? I'm just saying she knows who the good guys are, right? Okay, thanks. What's next? Hey. Did the Celtics win last night? Okay, when I say did they win, you can just say yes or no. What are you doing? I'm not on you, I'm just asking. Modern American history sucks. You want to study history, study the Crusades, the fall of the Roman Empire from Theoddoseus to Justinian. Damn right the Visigoths. Modern history's another name for television. Is there any way I can help? I'm a master of modern history, you can ask me anything.  I don't know. They said you needed to see me. What's going on? Hey. Oh man, they got it again?  A US case? How long? Do we say anything in the meantime? Yeah, we got to wait. The second we say positive, beef futures collapse, and we lose 3.6 billion in beef exports. Fast food is deserted, supermarkets pull beef, it's panic - I want to talk to some more people, but in the meantime, we wait.  All right. Unfunded mandates. Don't give me their grumbles. Are employees in wheelchairs supposed to work in the parking lot? How much would it cost the federal government to amend the unfunded mandates we format to cover all unfunded mandates? Let's find out for sure then tell Siegel to sit down and shut up. No. So paint a picture for me, would you? How many? That's the live cattle. What about the beef? That's a hundred and fifty billion dollar industry. What's the West going to do for a living? People have known about this disease; they're still eating beef in record numbers. And then the corn and soybean growers, right? Any good news? So we've got frightened parents, rising food prices, public panic, massive layoffs, and something we've never had to worry about before, we're wondering when the next case is gonna happen. The most costly disruptions... Always happen when something we take completely for granted stops working for a minute.  Okay. Oh, hey - do you know when we passed the Clean Water Act? How could you not know that? What'd I just say?  All right. Nope, nothing. No. You know, Charlie... History can't be reduced to dates and names. Nah. I'm starting you out with a copy of the speech George Perkins March used in 1845 to rouse the agricultural community of Rutland, Vermont. Then you're going to need to study on the word "ecology," as coined by the German biologist Ernst Heikl.  Better in the original German, of course, but obviously the translation will be fine. You really wanna talk about the lawsuit in Colorado? You hear about the lawyer who opened a chain of dry cleaners? "Press your lawsuit while you wait?"  There was a better joke in there someplace, right? Doctrine of Sovereign Immunity. You can't sue the king. We brought it over from England. Forgot to bring that one over. The RNC has a press conference when I sneeze. Congress won't pass it. People know where I stand. If they don't know, they can ask me. And I was for it then. Never did anything about it because nobody wanted it. And, frankly, why waste time in Capitol? I can't be responsible every time somebody irrationally twists my meaning. People are responsible for themselves. Today's cars are safer than they've ever been. They've all got air bags, they've all got seatbelts, and they're all crash tested from here to Tuesday. All that's left is personal behavior and bad luck, and, I'm not responsible for either one. And, Sam, if Mrs. Landingham w as here right now, she'd say the exact same thing. You know what I'm saying? I don't blame this woman for suing me. I'm not a king, and I'm not sure the law should treat me like one. Though certainly for the moment I don't mind. I'm not blaming her. She's got to go someplace with her grief and her anger. The ones who should be horsewhipped with a horsewhip are the ones exploiting her grief for political gain, and I'm not getting down with those guys.  Let Congress pass that law. I'll sign it.  Yeah, let's go. Get Leo. Thank you. Isn't there a joke to be had with lawsuits and dry cleaners? I've been working on it all day. Yeah. Hey. Okay, what do we think? When do you tell the public what you know?  Something going on with them?  If it comes from the President-- All right, that's what we'll do then. Toby. What's going on with the Smithsonian? Where are you leading them? You're changing. Yes, you are. Okay. Ah, Toby. We've gotta straighten out Medicaid. You know, after the Civil War, veterans had to come to D.C. to get their pensions? They had to visit the office personally. They waited for a clerk to look through all the Civil War records until their papers were found. You know what their papers were bound with? Red tape. That's where it comes from. Go and apologize to C.J. for whatever you did. Like that matters. What's next? What? What?  It was interesting, but what? I forgot. Hey, I forgot. Get the information from Toby, I'll make the call myself. Get the information. Get the director of the CMSO on the phone. 1972. Is when we passed the Clean Water Act. You know nothing about the Visigoths. And I know everything. WRITTEN BY: AARON SORKIN DIRECTED BY: THOMAS SCHLAMME  Listen, I don't care that much about your ass but if you need to perjure yourself to protect me you're going to damn well do it. Whatever it is Josh does, you're going to let him do it. Yeah, yeah. How does she look to you? Her. What's she wearing? I like you and her. It's like a '50s screwball comedy What was that? I'm not doing anything tomorrow night. It's Christmas Eve. Yeah. Actually, nobody does. You got about a thousand people in this building standing with you right now. Okay.  Huh? Thomas Hilton started a fishing village here in 1623, Allen. Yeah. And a slogan's going to do that? Yeah? Oh, oh, slow down, you're going too fast. $367 million in snowmobiling?  And the goggles... That includes the goggles? Okay. Thanks, guys.  Mrs. Landingham! Thanks. Speaking of crusty New England relics... Nah. Abbey wants to eat at Patsy's tonight. Would you let them know we're coming? What's next? Leo's here?  Leo! Yeah, yeah. Hey. Jenny and Mallory are okay? What are you doing here? What are you doing...? Everything's okay? Why didn't you call? Where are you staying? What do you want to talk to me about? I think that's great, man. I think it's about time. You probably mean the House, but I think you should consider the Senate seat in Illinois in two years; I can help raise money. Hey, Leo, I swear to God there's no one I'd rather see in the Oval Office than you but if you run there's going to be a lot of discussion about Valium and Alcohol. I mean, it's going to come out; this is the world. Who? What? Leo takes a napkin out of his pocket, licks it, and sticks it on the posterboard easel. It reads "Bartlet for America." Well, the phone calls have been coming all morning, Governor. You should know that Algiss Skyler called. Skyler wants to know why the hell you haven't. Was Eisenhower wrong in '57? Kennedy in '61? We don't know what the situation is, do we, Josh? Do we know what's going on, Agent Casper? Edward, so far the churches have been empty. There have been no fatalities. But tomorrow night's Christmas Eve. They're going to be packed. So why shouldn't I send troops in? This doesn't happen in New Hampshire. We'll meet again this afternoon. Thank you, Governor. Josh, stick around. So, what have you got cooking? I said, what have you got cooking? Yes, you do. I know what happened at the third debate. He told me. I know what's going to happen this afternoon. What are you going to do? Are you going to try and get Gibson out of the room when it's his turn to question? Where are we? Abbey's about to get spanked. Guys, the things we do to women. My wife's a world-class scientist. Yeah. Which one's he? They're all young. Listen, they want me to do some things before South Dakota. Yeah, we're lookin' past that. Full financial disclosure... They want me to take a physical. What's a physical right now gonna show?  I'm not lying to anybody, Abbey. I'm taking a physical - a physical which I'm under no legal obligation to take. I'm doing it voluntarily. Now is when people are listening. I'll make my speeches, get whooped on Super Tuesday, and we'll all go home.  The things we do to women. Toby? Josh? Sam? C.J.?  All right, let's do it.  Senator. I'd like you to be the Vice-President. Why don't you sit with Abbey and me for a few minutes.  Can I have the room, please?  You want anything? Coffee or anything? You ran a good campaign.  You're a young man. You'll be back. There's something you need to know. It's why I asked everyone to leave the room.  A few years ago, I was diagnosed with a relapsing remitting course of MS. Multiple sclerosis. Yeah. I told you because it's something you're gonna need to know. But also because I wanted to show that I trust you.  Yeah.  Well, what do you say?  I'd like your answer now, John. I'm gonna stretch my legs. Yeah? Tell me. Conspirators? All right. Here come the Tennessee Volunteers. Reverend, have the pastors encourage the women to bake those guys something nice. They're all spending Christmas Eve where they don't want to be. Ed, you get to be a hero to the blacks in your state. Anybody in your state doesn't like it the FBI is calling the shots. What could you do? Anything else? I'm sorry. I've forgotten your name. How'd you get him? A two-year investigation gets its first crack from a broken taillight. God, well, some of the stupidest criminals in the world are working right here in America. I've always been very proud of that. Thank you, Agent Casper. So, what's going on? It's not going to happen? It was a long shot, anyway. Look, I wanted to see him spared this but Leo's made out of leather. His face has a map of the world on it. Leo comes back. All right. Damn it. It's good.  It won't be later. This is a 550 seat theater and they'll be seated a half-hour before we start, so the temperature'll be up four to six degrees.  No.  No, no. Not now.  Yeah. G'abbey... G'abbey... Well, well, well. Dodged a bullet.  Which is more than I can say for me in Rosslyn. Did you get a date with her? I did the church thing in Tennessee okay. I did it without you. So anyway, I have a present for you. Merry Christmas, Leo. napkin from their first meeting in New Hampshire. It's wrinkled but it's still legible. Leo stares at it for several moments, then slowly looks up at Bartlet. Clearly, he's very moved. That was awfully nice of you. Charlie. How was your weekend? What'd you do? Time well spent. Weren't you going to a flea market? You didn't have to do that. Nice sucking up. Look at these topographical details. Seriously, I'm going to have this framed, this is great. No, I'm going to play with it some more. Look at this map. 1709. The Dead Sea, Jordan River, Mount Sinai. You want to come inside? Thanks again, Charlie. How'd it go? Yeah. What did they offer? They didn't offer nothing. Censure? Well, I get it but see what you can do about it, okay? No, I've got a security briefing downstairs. Hey. Good afternoon, Mr. President. There seems to be a growing consensus that no one's going to believe I'm serious about paying down a trillion dollars of the debt when I'm willing to spend $200 billion on the child poverty fund. I'm not saying we're not going to do it. We're just going to find a different way of saying we're going to do it. Anything else? Thank you. What's going on? Fiction or nonfiction? What else? All right. Hey, you want to see something? Charlie gave this to me. It's a map of the Holy Land, drawn in 1709. He got at a flea market. It's hand-colored, copper engraved. I was going to put it in the outer office. Yeah. Why? Yeah. Why? It was drawn in 1709. There was no Israel. Israel wouldn't happen for another 250 years. So, what's the problem with the map? Why? Take lunch, would you? "By God, I'm 50, alive, and the King all at the same time." ...it matters a great deal." Are you trying to tell me something? Okay. Yeah? Thanks. Hey, C.J. You, too. What's up? Let's lay odds. I've heard about the book. Yes? Yeah? When you're going to be a father you're rooting for ten fingers and ten toes, and that's it. Wait. I want to show you this great map Charlie found. C.J.?! There was no Israel in 1709. So, it's not on the map. That's ridiculous. If I put it someplace else? Leo has--in what used to be his house when he was married--a map of the United States. The first third of it is the 13 original colonies. The second third of it is the French territory of Louisiana. And the third third is Mexico. In this map of the United States, there is not a single state. That's because when this map was made there was no United States. I am the President of the United States and I'm not offended by it. I'm having it enlarged and bolting it to the hood of my limo. They don't want us to put up our map, Charlie. They're philistines in the fight for freedom but that doesn't bother us, does it? Never mind. That's the key. An old map. An old map. Spin that. Anything else? Thank you. Sure. Everybody's working late. How's it going? The early drafts look good. I heard. Look, I'm really not going to talk to you about my underwear. No, but I guess that doesn't mean it wasn't. I don't. I don't even remember the meeting. Why does it matter? I said, "Why does it matter?" Neither do I. Excuse me. You want to step in for a second? Yeah. No. A little bit. Mostly, I've been talking with Babish and some of the deputies. The Chairman, Trent, the Speaker, the Minority Leader. Yeah, I'm going to do it. Yeah. Yeah. There's another reason. I was wrong. I was. I was just...I was wrong. Come on, you know that. Lots of times we don't know what right or wrong is but lots of times we do and come on, this is one. I may not have had sinister intent at the outset but there were plenty of opportunities for me to make it right. No one in government takes responsibility for anything anymore. We foster, we obfuscate, we rationalize. "Everybody does it." That's what we say. So we come to occupy a moral safe house where everyone's to blame so no one's guilty. I'm to blame. I was wrong. As a matter of fact, it's not a Joint Resolution. The President still has to sign a Joint Resolution so, technically, it's a Concurrent Resolution. House Concurrent Resolution 172. The lawyers will haggle over the wording in the next few days. So, at least I'll make history, huh? He was censured in '34. He got it expunged in '36. No. Let me ask you something. You may be the last sane voice around here. I don't believe this. In Lebanon. Not here. It's not like I'm thinking "God, I was going to recognize Israel, but now that I've seen this map..." You know what? Let's just sit here quietly. We stand at a critical point--a time of choosing. If we take the hard course, the right course, there is no limit to what we can achieve. There is no limit to what we will achieve... ...And we will leave a safer, cleaner planet for future generations... ...this time, but I have the utmost confidence... ...whether it be two years or 22... ...that is under protective... I have abiding respect for the Speaker of the House and the Majority Leader. They are men of fundamental decency and public servants of purpose. ...to the men and women of both chambers, who have labored to shed the weight of partisanship and donned the cloak of progress. It may be said that in the last half century, America won the Cold War and modeled freedom for a waiting world. Today, we are faced with a new challenge... ...Now in a new century, when we meet and master new forms of aggression and hatred, ignorance and evil, our vigilance in the face of oppression and global terror will be unequaled by any moment of human history. And to the enemies of freedom, the enemies of democracy, the enemies of America, the enemies of humanity itself, we say here tonight with one voice. There is no corner of this earth so remote, no cave so dark, that you will not be found and brought to light and ended. More APPLAUSE. A majority of the audience gives Bartlet a standing ovation. Sam dons a proud look. The lines are way above 50 now, indicating high 60s and 70s. I'm sorry? Abbey just went to take a phone call.  What did you just say? Right. The part I understand was Bobby saying we could cure cancer in ten years. In other words, make it so that people could live with it? What is standing between us and that happening? Who at this table knows? How much money would it cost? He just said... He just said ten years. I want to hear about this from the beginning. Talk to me like I'm not an oncologist. I'm not messing around. This isn't barbecue night. I'm the Commander-in-Chief. Put your asses in the chairs. I want to call everybody in. I just had dinner with some of Abbey's friends. They're all oncologists. I think in the State of the Union, I can announce that I'm directing our researchers to have a cure for cancer in ten years. Call everybody in. Good evening. Thanks for being here so late. A President stood up. He said we will land a man on the moon before the end of the decade. You know what we knew when he said that? Nothing. We didn't know anything. We didn't know about the lunar surface. We didn't know how to land one of these things. All we'd ever done is crash it into the ocean. And God knows we could figure out how to land soft. We didn't know how to blast off again, but a President said we're gonna do it, and we did it. So I ask you, why shouldn't I stand up and say we are going to cure cancer in ten years? I'm really asking. Nobody knows. Toby. Why? How? You think people with cancer care what my motives are? You think their families do? Joey? Once again, why would somebody...? I didn't... Sam. Why shouldn't I do it? I'm sorry. I know it's late, but I want to start seeing drafts of a new section in the next few hours. C.J., I want a sense of a media overview, too. Now. I just want to look at some drafts. Yeah. Come on in. You got it? This is good. Yeah. Yeah. We'd want to include the Society of Clinical Oncology. The OMB would have to score it. We haven't identified the offsets to pay for it. We can barely tell them what the it is.  It was a good idea though. So we don't get water from a rock. We just do our thing and take our chances.  We're gonna have to do it awfully well this time. Anything else? Somebody get these guys some pie. TELEPLAY BY: KEVIN FALLS AND AARON SORKIN STORY BY: GENE SPERLING DIRECTED BY: ALEX GRAVES You can check a whip count, but I don’t think we get 60 votes in a cloture motion. I think we lose eight Democrats once they find there is a foreign aid budget.  Anything else? What’s up? Look, he’s gonna make statements during the primary that force me to move to my left. It’s not like I get a swing at every pitch, right? You and I know different. Every candidate’s dream opponent, huh? I’ll take a look at what Sam does. I’ll take a look at it. No. I reworked it. Yeah. I was trying to avoid a quote. It’s purposely nonspecific. We get the word out to our friends, but I was obviously nodding in the direction of affirmative action. Nobody’s questioning where we stand. I don’t want to campaign today. We will, but we don’t... Man, we don’t have to piss people off everyday in order to demonstrate that we’re not... Look, we’re going to Iowa where we already won. I’m not ignoring the state, and I say thank you for getting me elected in the first place, and we’re back on the plane. And I’ll tell you what else. I don’t think it’s a good idea for us to be fighting for news coverage with three governors, two senators, and the head of the church of I Hate You. Let’s just get in under the radar. I’ll say a few words. That’s it. Well, farming isn’t the only cause, even the main cause, but it’s a significance in land use in watersheds and run-offs from dairy operations from hog and poultry operations. They can be carried into the water by rainfall and snowmelt. It’s what’s called “non point source pollution.” Yeah, over here.  Well, you know what, now that we’ve abolished discrimination in our laws, we need to abolish it in our hearts and minds. Thanks a lot everybody. It’s great to be back in Iowa. Yeah? No. Charlie? Send him in. I thought you’d gone home. It’s gonna be Ritchie. I mean it’s gonna be Ritchie. It would have been, I don’t know, it would have seemed obnoxious. It would’ve seemed like grandstanding.  You want some bourbon?  What do you think? Toby, if you have something to say, please say it.  My family signed the Declaration of Independence. You think I’ve got an ethnicity problem? Yeah? It’s always been like that. You’re not telling me anything I don’t know. Toby... It wasn’t the moment to go.  Do you have anything else? But? You’re gonna sing a country western song?  This stopped being fun for me a little while ago. It was actually never fun for me. I was just being polite.  Excuse me?  Yeah. He hit me. Why? I’m done being polite now. Toby, it was a complicated relationship. Can I help you? It was a complicated relationship. Why are we talking about this? You have stepped WAY over the line, and any other President would have your ass on the sidewalk right now. They would’ve had you on the sidewalk a long time ago.  I don’t know what the hell goes on in a Brooklyn shrink’s office, but get it the hell out of my house! Dr. Keyworth. Did you know anyone on the plane?  The speech is going out? Okay. I'm Jed Bartlet. I guess we knew that? I've been having trouble sleeping. You understand that this is an election here, right? I mean by itself who cares? The President's having trouble sleeping, he talks to a doctor, but with the MS and the hearings and you're a psychiatrist...  Okay. Yeah. Yeah, we know you. You helped Josh out last year? Me, too. How would I know? Thank you.  I can't sleep. I stay awake. Four nights. Right. Yeah. The third night. Not 'til the next morning in the middle of a national security briefing.  Stanley, I think you're under-selling yourself when you say you're not an expert in sleep disoders. 'Cause you've been right straight on the money so far.  Not many. Never has before.  You think if I put this out, I'm gonna fall asleep? Then let's move on. No. No. No. I'm sorry. Before we get to lifestyle factors, I'm just gonna turn this on. It's a closed-circuit thing. I'm at the U.N. on Monday. When we're done writing it.  Like what? Nah. No. Noise? Planes aren't allowed to fly over the White House. Right. Four or five hours. Psychological factors. What were the odds? No. Well, Congress was investigating me. And I was censured. Then I had to give the State of the Union. I'm running for reelection. Things are blowing up everywhere, and I have chosen the General Assembly of the U.N. to define a tougher foreign policy. Not unusually stressful, no. I don't like the word "stress". It's a Madison Avenue word. It's something that can be cured with flavored coffee and bath bubbles. I have a job I like, and my family's healthy. Stress is for other people. I'm saying it's not stress. I was feeling stressed five nights ago, too and I slept fine. I want my money back. I get that a lot. So, what do you charge? For three hundred and seventy-five dollars an hour, you ought to bring your own damn lingerie. There's a great story about Arthur Miller. "Death of a Salesman" had just opened on Broadway the night before, and he was walking around his old neighborhood in Brooklyn and he see's a hot dog vendor that he went to high school with, and he says, "Hey, Jimmy, it's me, Arthur Miller." And the hot dog vendor says, "Artie, how you doing? What you been up to?" And Miller says, "I'm, you know, I'm a playwright." And the hot dog vendor says, "Hmm, play writing, I should've gone into that." Three hundred and seventy-five dollars an hour. For what? I can't sleep. I can't sleep. I'll be tired and I'll lie there and it doesn't happen. I won the Iowa Caucus. That's not enough? Say what you'd say to anyother patient.  I had a conversation with one of m aides that night after we got back from Iowa. He called me on something. Well, I guess we talked about a lot of things. Who we think the Republican challenger is gonna be be, and imcumbency and campaign stategy, strategic overview, but the long and short of it is, my father never liked me at all. Yeah, I'd thought you'd enjoy that. I told you... What's wrong with my head? Of course not. That would be three hundred and eighty-five dollars an hour. It's not good for a person to keep setting goals? Well, I'm told that most men lead lives of quiet desperation. I have abilities. I think I have. I think you're talking about the Lincoln Bedroom. That's not easy. It's not easy. I think I've made tough choices. You don't know anything. I'm not trying to get my father to like me. What? Stanley, I hate to put it this way, but I'm me, and you're you, and we're done when I say we're done. Thank you! I'm sorry? We spoke several times about Kashmir, and she assured me they're working towards a peaceful resolution. We also had a spirited conversation about chess. Chess was invented in India. Somewhere around 600 A.D., a gigantic chessboard was constructed at Fatehpur Sikri which was the capital a long time ago, and human figures were used as chess pieces. They moved at the Emperor's will. That's what I like to call the good old days.  In sandlewood, and a laquered classic Stanton in boxwood.  Hartsfield votes in three hours and 21 minutes! We're gonna find out who the next President is. I'm gonna give some of the chess sets out as gifts, did you see them? Did he say-? Yeah? What's going on? Where? What's China's reaction? Big? How big? No. I mean, we could try, but they're not gonna go for it. What are they asking for? Tonight? I'm assuming Nancy and Fitzwallace and the Chiefs... You? We have a pretty good sense of the worst-case scenario? That sounds right. All right, we know the play. She gave me these beautiful chess sets. Yeah. I'm on my way. Let Fitzwallace know I'm gonna order the Seventh Fleet into the Taiwan Strait.  Let's go. Good evening. Listen, they start voting in Hartsfield's landing in about two and a half hours, so this may end up being somebody else's problem.  The scale of the war games is unprecedented? That's our next move. After our next move comes their next move. Excuse me. Thank you. How are you? Yeah, it's from me. The Prime Minister gave me a few different sets, and I wanted to give them as gifts. The State of the Union was really something else. This one's a Lotus set, hand-carved camel-bone. She told me it came to her from a direct descendent of Tan Sen. You know who that was? The greatest musician of his time. Sixteenth century. He'd go to the human chess matches at the Mogul Court of Emperor Akbar, and that began the family obsession with the game. Wanna play? Yeah. Why? No, I'm none of those things. I'm just grand.  You're white, but don't ever touch me. I was kidding. Ah, the Fibonacci opening. Very interesting. Yeah. Yeah. A billion dollars at the Export-Import Bank didn't hurt. Three billion in direct foreign investment to the forty-four billion China gets. You're an American, where would you rather put your money? Why? That's right. It's bad. If Kashmir's the most dangerous place on earth, the second most dangerous is the Taiwan Strait. Taiwan's got four hundred thousand troops on high alert; the size of China's war games is unprecedented. You think I should? Why not? That's right. Plus guess what?  The Patriot tests aren't why China's showing its teeth. Are you ready to come inside? By the end of the week, Taiwan's going to announce they are holding their first free elections. Defend your queen. Okay. Yeah? Yeah.  Give us a minute, would you? Thanks. Thanks. C'mon in. What's it say? No, that's for you. That was a joke. Not so funny, huh? It's a gift, for you. Yeah. It's hand-carved, it belonged to the Prime Minister's grandfather. He used it to play with Lord Mounbatten. Nah, she didn't, we just boosted it from the palace on our way out. I’ve got some little bottles of shampoo and conditioner, too. Sit down.  Come on, now. You were out of line, I was a jackass - let's call a truce.  Let's play chess. Yeah; he's... one, two, four, eight, twelve moves away from checkmate. Yeah. You take white. With Jawaharlal Nehru when they came to an agreement on the necessity of India's independence. Yeah. Taiwan's not gonna be our topic. Ah, the Evans Gambit! A variation of the Giuoco Piano opening, named after a British sea captain, W.D. Evans, who invented it in 1820 - don't tell me chess moves. Well, it's as popular today as it was back then. I'm sorry? Re-election and the Bartlet Psychosis. So we get right back on the horse. You apologized already, so let's get back on the horse. That makes it more likely we'll learn something. Yeah? Excuse me; eleven moves. Take your time.  Think happy thoughts... Sure. The Spanish brought chess to the court of Charlemagne in 760 AD. Charlemagne is French for Charles the Great. The Charles is a river in Boston. The Hudson River is actually not a river at all... Now take your time.  See the whole board. It is in the Catskills, but once it gets to Manhattan, it’s a tidal estuary. Yeah. Well, how do you think it went? That’s right, except they didn’t call them Patriots. What did they call them? Right. Good. No. Right. Yeah.  Your move. Move. Right.  See the whole board! Let me tell you, you’re really showing me something tonight. A lot of spunk, a lot of pluck, this game isn’t all about size, you know. There’s a little thing called heart, and you’ve got it, my friend. Check. I had a friend in school who taught me. He was good. He was ranked 18 and under. He was a really nice guy, everybody liked him. David Wheaton. Everybody had a crush on his sister. He went on to Princeton and Christmas vacation, he’d saved up to go to San Francisco and he was on the wharf and he saw a guy beating a woman up and he went in to stop it and the guy stabbed him to death. So you know, I had this historic stretch of sleeplessness after our last meeting? Got so bad Leo brought in a guy from ATVA who worked with Josh. Yeah, but we know him, and I figured he had to go to school for everything, so... Anyway, we brought him in late at night. He said it was your fault. He said you shouldn’t bother me so much. I’m kidding. Let’s go ahead and say the Republicans nominate Ritchie. First of all, I’d stop for a moment and say, you know, ‘why?’ I mean they got some serious guys in the field. Kalmbach, Daniel, Wesley? That’s true.  You think the strike against me is nobody likes the smartest kid in the class. I don’t do that. And I’m not a snob. If a guy is a good neighbor, if he puts in a day, if every once in a while he laughs, if every once in a while he thinks about somebody else and, above all else, if he can find his way to compassion and, and tolerance, then he’s my brother, I don’t give a damn if he didn’t get past finger-painting. What I can’t stomach are people who’re out to convince people that the educated are soft and privileged and out to make them feel like they’re less, then, you know, ‘he may be educated, but I’m plain-spoken, just like you!’ Especially when we know that education can be a silver bullet, it can be the silver bullet, Toby! For crime, poverty, unemployment, drugs, hate... I’m saying I don’t watch the pitch go by. And if I do, it’s not because my father...  Can we talk... God, can we talk about, please, can we talk about my father with some respect? The man’s gone, can we... he’s my father, he wasn’t a Dickens character! Yeah. Check. Check. Check. I’ll be back. Don’t cheat. I know exactly where the pieces on the board are. I know exactly where the pieces are on Sam’s board. I know exactly where the pieces still are on David Wheaton’s.  All right.  You can bring the ambassador back now and get Beijing. The Aegis Destroyers. I don’t know, but for sure we’re gonna blame you. I don’t know. Toby keeps coming back at me with this... I don’t know. He says I let the pitch go by. I soften... I smooth myself out publicly. It’s not a put-on, by the way, I’m honestly folksy. Yeah what? You agree with him? I don’t. Yeah, well, he keeps coming back at me. All right.  Just playing some chess.   What’s your point? I don’t want to be killed. Pick your king up. We’re not done playing yet. Sorry. I got tied up. Let’s get back to it. Yeah. No. Look at the whole board. You’re not. Sam... Are they in the Taiwan Strait? Is that the same thing?  Like this. Turn them around. I’ll make some calls and thank people. Thank you, by the way.  Okay. Right. Yes. Ten years, but you’ve got it. And so...  But everybody wakes up alive in the morning and saves a little face. You have a lot of help. You listen to everybody and then you call the play.  That’s checkmate.  I do.  Are they new?  You've worn them?  I love them. "Laissez-faire doctrine." 15 letters. No, that's not the answer. See, 'cause Social Darwinism isn't a doctrine. It's a force of nature. The answer is "libertarianism."  Take your time. Boo boo, I gave up on getting you out the door in the late 70's. Plus, it's your birthday. You're old, and you don't move around that fast. I know, so I'm shading in the extra box.  It's your birthday week. It's a week of festivities like Mardi Gras or Lent. Three letters. "It may be bitter." "Tea," right? Yeah. 'Cause "woman" doesn't fit. Hey, when the Medical Board gives you the results of the hearing, do they slap it up on one of those X-ray light boards? "Here's where the problem is with your testimony, Abbey. Here and here." See, I know it sounds like you're praising me, but...  It's not your life or 12 years of anything or anything. They're gonna give you the very least they can give you. Well, that was stupid. Standing by your convictions isn't gonna get you anywhere. This isn't some guy off the street talking. I'm a very successful politician. About 200, but that was five or six hours ago when it started. "Body organ, produces hydrochloric acid." That's the kidney, right? Or the lima bean? See, they can't take medical school away from you. Abbey, come here. I know you're scared. I'm very confident. So you be whatever you want. Whatever happens happens tomorrow. Tonight is your birthday party, and your earrings are great, so are your shoes. So can we, for the love of God, get out of this room?! Yeah. Pheasant and morel consomme, miniature ravioli of fois gras and smoked goose confit, a little Canary melon sorbet as a palate cleanser, all served on the finest Lenox china. A '97 Willamette Valley Pinot Noir. A '94 Hog Cellars Zinfandel. I'm like Gatsby, but without the problems. Hmm. I kind of wished you'd mentioned that before.  It's gonna be relaxed. It's gonna be relaxed.  For dessert, we're having Kumquat Napoleons. Okay. Amy. Donna was invited. All the women of the west wing. We're doing a calendar. Now, it's a party! All right. You know, John, there are places in the world where it might be considered rude to talk about the physical attributes of another man's wife. That was nice of her.  What did I do? Look, obviously, we knew this was gonna be a thing, but it doesn't have to be tonight, right? I'm pretty sure he means Leo. No.  So! So far so good.  Charlie! I'm gonna need you later. I want to work on my toast. I don't need help writing it. I can write a damn toast. I just want to say it out loud to somebody. Any warm body is fine. So when I give you the signal, we'll go off someplace. It'll be something like "Charlie, we're gonna go work on the toast now." You finally got here. I think Abbey's gonna pull a hamstring about tomorrow. About what? I'm feeling all right about it.  I don't know. She's pretty pissed. Yeah. All right. Loved it. "I've known my wife, Abbey, for nearly 150 years." No, I'm not gonna do that. She's not gonna think that's funny. Okay. I should... Yeah. Okay. "Thank you all for being here tonight." By the way, do you know where the term "toast" comes from? Yeah. I was talking to you. The Stuarts. They put a piece of toast in your wine cup to improve the flavor. 1643. Members of the Middle Temple toasted Princess Elizabeth by pledging to die in her service. C.J., I haven't seen you all night. Charlie.  What is it? No. Damn it. We're pretty sure the Board was evenly divided, and Nolan was the deciding vote, which dictated a lot of her... Damn it! Yeah, they worked together for 20 years, and I was the governor who appointed him to the Board. C.J., you should probably tell Abbey. Thanks. The Union-Leader says Nolan's gonna recuse himself. They're gonna suspend her license for a year. And? I was pretty concerned about that. Can you leave me alone? I'm trying to be a husband, and your mojo's getting all over me. This is Brendan McGann, right? Yeah. I don't know what to say about that. Yeah. Okay. Here we go. That's when the juices get flowing. I could tell the story of the ditch digger. You know the story? Abbey and I were walking along and we see a ditch digger, and I said, "Aren't you glad you married me? You could've married a ditch digger." And she said, "Jed, if I'd married him, he'd be President." What do you think? Why? It is. Very deeply. No, it won't. In my house, anyone who uses one word when they could have used ten just isn't trying hard. Let's keep at it.  What the hell is going on?! I was gone for 45 minutes. They were all Americans when I left. I called Nolan. I know I shouldn't have, but I'm sorry. The rules are different when it comes to my family. There isn't a man in America who doesn't understand that. I also think partiality isn't a vice in this case. He knows you, and that's a good thing. He's gonna consider not recusing himself. Okay. I'm gonna do a toast and everything in a minute, and I'll tell the ditch story, but I wanted to say that I love you very much. Don't call me that. I'm standing right here! Good to be talking to you. The Mural Room as a matter of fact. That's right, and Thursday night we're going to talk about energy dependence versus independence and cleaner burning fuels that get up to 80 miles per gallon versus oil-based fuels that pump billions of pounds of pollution into our air and perhaps just as important our vulnerable to very volatile price spikes. We want to talk about controlling our destiny through innovation instead of relying so heavily on foreign oil. Yeah. 65% of the world's oil reserves are in the Mid East. 3% are here at home. I, for one, wouldn't mind sending a little less of my money over there and the only alternative is to use less oil. I hope so, but there'll be plenty of time for campaigning come the fall. Thursday night is about America's energy future. Thank you, Kim. I'm-- Terry, I'm sorry. That was my ninth interview this morning. Well, I guess we'll be ready to run against whoever we have to run against. Rob Ritchie? I don't know him very well. Thank you. We can talk about my book. Yeah. Thanks. What else? Got it. Okay what? Drilling/exploring. Saudi Arabia bad. Okay. Why are you smiling? Okay. Good morning. Thanks for having me. And to shill for my new energy plan, which is about raising fuel economy standards, working with Detroit to develop hybrid cars, and using tax incentives to promote alternative energy. After a decade of wars with Iraq and a spread of religious extremism in Saudi Arabia, we still rely on this very dangerous, very uncertain region for a quarter of our oil reserves. And I, for one, wouldn't mind not sending quite so much of my money there. Exploring is what Magellan did and Balboa and Jacques Cousteau. What we're talking about is drilling which is the only way you know if there's oil there and which will forever damage national treasures like ANWAR. Clean Coal is a term that pollsters came up with 'cause it polls higher then regular coal. What we want are real cleaner burning fuels. We want to control our destiny through innovation and that's what we're going to be talking about Thursday night. My pleasure. Leslie, right? Thanks a lot. There'll be plenty of bait in September-October. I'll read it when he does. I don't know, Leslie. I think we might be talking about a .22 caliber mind in a .357 magnum world. Okay, thanks again.  Who's next? What? Sorry I'm late. We hearing from the Michigan delegation? Polluters aren't going to write the environmental laws. What about the Energy's Workers Union? It is. What else? For what? Let me ask you something. You're pretty dumb, did you take offense? Look at that. I did it again. Yeah? Calling me impolite? I don't know. I guess the biggest names. All right, I'm going back to work. (singing) Another sky Another June Another something that rhymes with June Another reason, another season For making... (stops singing) Wait a sec. No, wait a sec. He's absolutely right. Hang on. Excuse me. I'm sorry for interrupting. No, no, keep your seats. Leo? You're absolutely right. We shouldn't show up. Tell the Whip we want to yield all our time. While they're going in front of the cameras complaining about me making fun of Ritchie, the Democrats will be caucusing on literacy and tuition tax credits. We want to yield all our time. Thank you. All right, here we go. What time is it?  Thank you, everyone. C.J.? I've been meaning to tell you, you've done really well this week with the open-mike thing. Didn't turn out too bad. Okay. We're e-filing the old 1040A. You're single, head of your household, Deanna's a dependent, your adjusted gross income is $35,000 per annum. I love doing this. Yeah. Yeah. What? Suckers. Okay. Your mom's Social Security pension benefits is $1536. Police pension $2400. "Do you take standard deduction, or do you itemize?" Did you make any charitable donations? Really?  You're better off with the standard deduction. I'm hitting 'send' now. If you're lying about any of this, you're going to the joint. It's gonna tell us what your refund is, but I've done a quick calculation, and it'll be $700. You spent it already, haven't you? Yeoman of the Guard? Can I tell you what's messed up about James Bond? Shaken not stirred will get you cold water with a dash of gin and dry vermouth. The reason you stir it with a special spoon is so not to chip the ice. James is ordering a weak martini and being snooty about it. Okay. 400. You owe $400. And you don't even need a stamp. Hand it over. Whatever. Hand it over. That's not quite how we see it. Sure. You need me? Let's go inside.  Milo, Coop, would you help Mr. Young find his pockets, please? What happened? It crashed? Are there populated areas nearby? Charlie? Conference in the Chief with the Radiological Assistance Team. Charlie, get me Fitzwallace, Nancy McNally, and let the senior members of the NSC know I might need them tonight.  Yeah. Hey. What would you have done a half hour ago that hasn't already been done? I know. If only technology could invent some way to get in touch with you in an emergency. Some sort of telephonic device with a personalized number we could call to let you know that we needed you. Perhaps it would look something like this, Mr. Moto!  Would you stop? You know I've noticed that other people keep a set of comfortable clothes in their office for when they have to work late. I like that -- you should do that too. Oh. You should change. Never mind. But? I'm pretty sure he's right. Yeah, Leo? I knew this a half hour ago. This whole night I'm going to be a half hour smarter than you.  No. The driver's dead? Arab? Is that his name or is that what we think it is right now? In what happens to be the most dangerous and unanticipated situation for the transportation of nuclear waste.  What's that meeting next door? Leo. A trip to Banana Republic would have killed you?  Let's go. That's never been a problem for us before. Well, that's FEMA's call, isn't it? I should set a ransom. I'll tell you what the radiation levels are, but first I want your electoral votes. Or is that a bad strategy? Okay, no ransom. We'll play this one straight. What about other shipments? Have we stopped the train? What about the second? They beefed up the escort? Ok. Yup. It was the rebate. You say potato. We wanted to inject some money into retail and tourism. The economy might have improved on its own by then. Yeah. Not that much. Most people did what you did. They saved or they paid down debt. We do, but when the next guy's President. I always do. I'll tell you what I find interesting though. You. $35,000 a year, a sister to support, and you gave $1,435 to charity. I'm not so sure that check isn't better off in your hands than ours. Oh, I'm taking it. Don't be ridiculous. But when you get to your place tonight you're going to find a new DVD player and that wimp-ass Bond movie. And I threw in Yeoman of the Guard on CD. I'm really something. Hey, John. Yeah. Charlie, let's get that woman on the phone. I'm feeling magical tonight. They're in the tunnel now and the readings don't show anything beyond the predictable level of background radiation. The flatbed is back on its way and the Carlsbad is behind gates so we dodged the bullet. We packed this stuff in 2 inches of stainless steel, 4 inches of lead. We've rammed it with trains and dropped it from helicopters and it still isn't going to protect us from the thing we haven't thought of. They took a cask out to Aberdeen Proving Ground and shot a TOW missile clean through it. They showed me video. What can I do for you? What? Really? Is there anybody left who's not? How long? For how long have you been in recovery? Did you say 22? You haven't had a drink since you were 22? I didn't start drinking till I was 25. What the hell do you guys count as... Twenty-two? You and James Bond ought to team up. He's ordering a watered down martini, and Leo what the hell is this meeting that's going on all night across the hall? Hey, did I hear right? Are you taking your name off that bill? You're taking your name off. We can't campaign on it. And if somebody's attacking us, you know what to do.  Yeah, but don't discount the possibility that it might be Leo. John, despite this recent revelation that you drank beer in college I've always liked you a little more than you thought I did, but that's not why you're staying. It's this.  Four words. Just a little, right? Me, too. Anything else? Charlie! Let's go. I'm a magic man.  Donnatella. Tell Josh that General Pulaski was a Polish Brigadier General who vanquished the Russian and Prussian military then came to the colonies and commanded our cavalry during the American revolution. It says here in a briefing paper hastily written by Deputy Josh Lyman that in the '60s when the Madison Superintendent of Schools banned Twelfth Night for reasons passing understanding, a Mrs. Molly Morello had students over to her house on Saturdays to read it. Yeah 'cause all I had tonight was a nuclear spill in Idaho. It says she came in two hours early to teach an AP English class she developed herself because the school didn't offer one. Sounds like she deserves a proclamation. I wish I could give her one, but I can't. It's just too much inside baseball, you know? Charlie, I've been tapping my finger on the desk for about a minute now. The magic man thing works a lot better when you pick up on the signals, Tonto. What's that you say? There's a phone call for Donna? Good evening, this is the White House, for whom are you holding?  Tell her where you are.  She didn't do anything. It's Jed Bartlet, Mrs. Morello. I've got a few questions. When you taught Beowulf, did you make the kids read it in the original Middle English or did you use a translation? Okay. We're going to call that the James Bond version. What are you planning on doing with your retirement? I'd stay away from the Elk Horn area of Idaho for a little while. You'll read why in the morning. Let's talk about Twelfth Night. Thank you all so much. Bye-bye. Bye-bye. Of what? What's he doing here? How big?  What are you talking about? That's got to be 50 million chips! Leo, how the hell did... That's the end of Antares. 98 thousand workers, I think 75 thousand in the US. Plus the kidney punch at NASDAQ... Yeah.  Fitz! Fitz, you old polecat, you old so-and-so! Yeah. Thank you. Yeah. What's the problem? What do you use heavy water for? Thank you so much. Thank you. Yeah. There's nothing we can do. Good morning.  Yeah, we can't do it. That's good enough for me. Well, Canada, Russia - roughly the same relationship with the US. Fitz, you old horse thief, you old muckety-muck! Josh says the director of MinAtom says it's commercial power production. Well, that's what was said by my National Security Advisor twenty minutes ago, right after it was said by the Secretaries of State and Defense. And, for what it's worth, the directors of the CIA, NSA, FBI and Naval Intelligence. You think the Iranians forced them to build them a heavy water reactor? Crap. And even if that were the case, it doesn't make them Jean Valjean. They want to power broker in the Middle East. Just what the doctor ordered for the Middle East. All right, while avoiding the biggest diplomacy disaster since I don't know when - Josh, Leo, you guys have to figure out a way to get me out of it. You're gonna get Secret Service protection, but I can't order it unless you sign this piece of paper, so sign this piece of paper. Because Ron says it is, and around here we do whatever Ron says. Good for you. With all your years of training and experience in sniffing out crime, your opinion really carries a lot of weight with me. Are you kidding? We're talking about one bodyguard. I have twelve, and that's before I leave the house. You ever count the number of guns that come along with me when Abbey and I take in a play at the Kennedy Center? Do I seem fragile to you? Then... I don't care. I don't care! You're part of my family, and this thing is happening and I simply won't permit it. Sign the piece of paper. Let me tell you something! The last time a member of my staff got a death threat, they missed him and hit me! Yeah! What's going on? Oh man, the greatest campaign speech ever about money - FDR promises to tighten our belts. What's he do when he gets here - spends more than we knew could be spent. And it's 'cause he discovered it's better for long-term growth.  Hey, I should be able to reference that speech. When did he give that? It was in the industrial North East. Charlie, FDR gave a budget speech in 1932 in Pittsburgh, can you get your hands on a copy? I said, FDR gave a budget speech in 1932... Okay. Mmm-hmmm. How's it going? No. What?  Aaaah, was wilst du von mein Leben? What do you want from my life? The government can't be in the business of cosigning loans.  It's a subsidy. I'm an economist! The marketplace will take care of Antares. That's what's supposed to happen. That was an industry that was hurt by unfair trade practices. Antares was hurt by their own carelessness. Unless they go under and either way they've just said 'We're open for business.'  They were huge contributors! How the hell am I supposed... They were huge contributors!  What? They're announcing end of business tomorrow?  I'm not saying anything, but grab some people and put together some numbers. I'm not saying anything. He'll do that? Anybody? Can I use this to get out of weddings and stuff?  Sam, the Majority Leader's gonna move up HMO reform and my Duma's gonna vote on it, what do you think? What? 'Stem the tide" is an English idiom. He is trying to send me a message.  We've been trying to get non-proliferation on the agenda, we've been trying to put those exact words in Chigorin's mouth. Fitz? Let's go to Helsinki. But the reactor's first thing on the agenda. Anybody? Thanks, everyone! Thank you. Thanks! I'll be right in. Sam! Nice job. Tell me again why I can't wear whatever the hell I want? I probably won't be wearing them. Whatever happened to Pong, huh? It was great, it was relaxing, it had that very satisfying sound? Yeah, me neither. Leo? No. Leo wanted to see if we could guarantee a loan. I appreciate that, and I can't give it to you, but I think I can do Leo one better. We'll stay his biggest customer. When you announce your recall, you can announce you're keeping your government contracts. Leo will work it out with Congress. Talk to me about the 75 thousand workers. All right. Jakie, this is the White House, if we only screw up twice before breakfast, it was a very good morning. One more thing: you can't make any more campaign contributions to me, or any Democrat. You can vote, but that's it. I knew I'd get screwed by a computer one day.   For the hundredth time, it was an homage! Alan Tatum? The White House owes you one picture.  Good to meet you! I'm sorry. I'm married to one. No, you meant that as a good thing! Let's go. FDR was a fine president, don't get me wrong, but if you want something done right, dammit, call New Hampshire! Come in, please. Are you retired, Mr. Tatum?  Your grandfather was a furnace worker. Your father was on a railroad. You couldn't find an honest work? Charlie!  Where are you going? You got pictures, what do you I get? You were there, you were at his feet, you got to tell me everything! Sit, we're going to get some food.  You sit quietly over there and try to resist temptation to bill me for something. Four or five hours, maybe, you'll be fine. They take all the Henrys. They do a thing, they call it War of the Roses. I'm told by those who saw it in London it's spectacular. Catholic charities bought out a Broadway theater. We're gonna go, we're gonna make some money. You know why? Cause the Royal National Company's got all the King Henrys up there and I'm still number one at the box office. Let me as you something, which Plantagenet do I most remind you of? Good morning. We just got done with Helsinki and the reactor. How do we know? General? So order it. I don't care if we know anything new or not, I need updates every half hour for the next 48 hours. It's Henry V, three Henry VI, and Henry VIII. What does that mean? It sounds modern. Well, that doesn't sound bad. Let me ask you something. If Shakespeare wrote a play about me, how many parts do you think it would be? Think about it. What are we doing? We're leaning on Arab Intelligence sources? We're leaning on them? I'm not going to the bunker. I'm not going to the bunker. It sends a terrible sign. I'm sitting in this room. You haven't been through it with me. You're telling me that the Secret Service, you're telling me my own bodyguards are gonna escort me to the bunker? Yeah. This doesn't mean anything to me. Where? Are we able to take a guess at where and when now?  What about Abdul Shareef? Isn't Shareef supposed to be helping us with intelligence out of Qumar? Thank you. I'm not going to the bunker. There are going to be people who aren't going to the bunker, and when I get out I'm not going to be able to tell them what to do anymore and I like doing that. Let's get Abby to New Hampshire but I'm not going to the bunker. And if you say I have to I'm walking across the alley with the Chief Justice and I'm handing John Hoynes my resignation. And as soon as he's sworn in I'm telling him to appoint me his Vice President because I'm not going to the bunker. If the agent's come, the agents come but tell Ron he'd better bring more than a couple of guys. You can send him in. Oakland, California. What did they find on board? What was the target? That wasn't on the list. So why'd they want it. The Golden Gate Bridge. This was on the west coast and we didn't know anything. I'm going to ask this again. Where the hell was Shareef? What do you mean? Yeah. Yeah. To who ? Are you telling me the Qumari defence minister may have ordered an attack on the Golden Gate Bridge? We have a diplomatic relationship with this country. He's coming here. Shareef is coming here, in like, ten days, isn't he? Get ready to say. Thank you.  You haven’t got it. We want to ask the Justice Department to indict Qumari Minister of Defense. We’re saying he’s a terror kingpin. We’re saying he’s killed I don’t know how many civilians and how many of Tommy’s Marines. We’re saying he’s compromised I don’t know how many agents throughout the world and we’re saying he’s done it in the clothing of an ally. This isn’t a cave dweller. This is Capone. You haven’t got it.  I’ve been seeing a shrink, by the way. I had trouble sleeping and Leo brought in a guy. I feel ridiculous talking out loud like this, but he said... Doesn’t matter. I just can’t believe it’s been a year. Anyway. What is it? What is it? Leo. “The enemy imagines he is secure. The bridge did not fall. He looks down from his high-- or elevated place or places-- but our great victory is still assured. There will be other moments. “I have brought him low, and I will do it again.”  All right. This is ridiculous. He's coming here. He's coming here! Why the hell can't we arrest him when he steps off the plane? Fitz makes a reasonable point. Doesn't it pretty much go without saying that I revoked it after he tried to blow up the Golden Gate Bridge? Why the hell do we need...? He's coming here on his own. He's delivering himself on a Lear jet. Fellas, this guy is going to stand trial in a US court and if we have to stick heroin on his plane to get him there, that's what we're going to do. It should be a showcase. He should have the best lawyers in the world. Why? The law cracks me up. What else? You suppose that could be any more patronizingly named? What do they want me to eat? Ah, the marriage incentives. What a bunch of horse manure. Is marriage really something that should be incentivised? And where the hell are all the small government conservatives when we're talking about Washington getting into the yenta business? You think we should do it? Marriage incentives. Used to be all you had to have was a decent dental practice. I'm erudite. Lets do it. Charlie. I appreciated you coming out to the cemetery with me yesterday. So it's been a year. Why don't you organize the search, you know for a new Executive Secretary. I may not like the first couple of candidates. It may take a while. Thank you.  They've got something for us. Did we solve immunity? Did we solve it? Why? Yeah. He was tortured? Well, I'm no lawyer, but I'm pretty sure that's inadmissible. We'll come up with a less aggressive way of... We'll cancel his trip here obviously, but we'll come up with something. That's the ball game. Josh, what the hell did you do to this welfare vote? Why? I'm going to that. I know. The fund-raiser was my idea. I've known the Archbishop for 20 years and I'm not playing politics with the church. Did anyone want to ask me abut this? You've got me running the vote from the mezzanine floor of a Broadway theatre. Where are we in the vote? We are? Why?  True or false, Josh: My life would be better right now if you and your girlfriend swapped jobs? Why is it for every good thing you do around here, we've got to endure three screwiest. Sorry doesn't get me 218. It doesn't get back the ad that slipped through your office any more then it gets back tobacco which you gave away for lunch money. And why the hell don't you know what Ritchie's commitments are before you get anywhere near my schedule? I've got the Presidential Box at a cattle call. Win the damn vote. I've got a G-8 briefing. What are you doing here? It's 1:00 in the morning. You were home? You came over here to stand in front of Josh? Why? What are you... Maybe. More counsel is going to help me violate international law. It's pretty easy to say anything is a war scenario. The war on poverty. It's a slippery slope. What? There are moral absolutes. Il Principe has justified every act of oppression... Says who? Well, a mob mentality is just... There are moral absolutes. Make the call. Hello. There are rules for these things? Doesn't the law also require that I not assassinate someone? I know. One of them was mine. Assume for a second I say yes. How do we do it? Fitz walks up to him with a gun? Why? The things we choose to care about. If it can't happen here, then why'd we care that Shareef was delivering himself? The British say yes? How many over there know about this? And some people in Bermuda?  Okay. Well... surely, this is the most absurd meeting I ever sat in, and friends, that is saying something. Yeah, I imagine. What does the pen do? Squirts poison? We give him it boxed. Tell them to put it in a box. It's "The War of the Roses." All the Henrys, and all the Richards, for that matter. Yeah. Yeah. There's also singing. No, but they're gonna sing from time to time, and one of the songs is a song I love. I can't think of the name now, but it's an Edwardian... It always reminds me... It makes me think of college, like, I don't know, like they should be singing it in the dining hall at Christ College at Cambridge. The chorus is, "And victorious in war shall be made glorious in peace." I was just singing it this morning. Good. Yeah. Let me ask you something. Is there a crime, which if it wasn't illegal, you would do? Right, but you wouldn't rob a bank? Connecticut had a law prohibiting the use of contraceptives. It was written out of rage against adultery. But in the age of AIDS, don't Connecticut residents do more for the general welfare by flagrantly breaking the law? Yeah. Stanley... I can't tell you. No, I really can't. It's high security. To say nothing of...  If I tell you I intend to commit a crime, you're required by law to report it.  I'm gonna go. It's good seeing you.  Who are these men? Okay. Yeah, I'm feeling particularly proud of that today. We're happy you visited us, Mr. Defense Minister. You're welcome here anytime, and please, send the best regards of the President of the United States to the Royal Sultan. Not in the Oval Office. Tell him I have a rash on my hand. Make sure you apologize. Yeah.  Thanks. It's a hand-carved incense burner. Gypsum and sandalwood. It's Fiderer?  I saw your resume, so we don't need to talk about that. What have you been doing recently? Like the sweaters? Uh-huh. And before that? You're a professional gambler. Whereabouts? Okay. Why did you leave the White House? Charlie! Can I have a minute?  Would you mind waiting outside just a moment?  Is this a joke? If it's a joke, it's both funny and well-executed, but I think you and I both know that it's not. I send you out to replace Delores Landingham, and that's what you came home with? She was an alpaca farmer who needed two tries to get her own name. Don't worry about it. I'm gonna get the Personnel Office on it. I got to go change for New York. What's going on? From this afternoon? Are you pledging a fraternity or something, 'cause this would be a good one. What's with you and this woman? Civilians get trials. They're gonna find out it's us. We could make it look like the plane went down, but they're gonna find out it's us, and I'm gonna be running for reelection while I'm fighting a war against Qumar. I want him tried. I understand. Yeah. What do you want from me? This isn't a matter of religion. I recognize that there's evil in the world. Doesn't this mean we join the league of ordinary nations? That's not my objection. It's just wrong. It's absolutely wrong. Why? Take him.  Caught me. Governor. I am. How about you? Yeah, I know. Listen, politics aside, and I don't want to make a big deal out of it, but you probably insulted the church, and you can head it off at the pass if you speak to the Cardinal tonight. No. Yeah.  No, I don't understand that. The center fielder for the Yankees is an accomplished classical guitarist. People who like baseball can't like books? No. Something horrible happened about an hour ago. C.J. Cregg was getting threats so we put an agent on her. He's a good guy. He was on my detail for a while, and he was in Rosslyn. He walked in the middle of an armed robbery, and was shot and killed after detaining one of the suspects.  We should have a great debate, Rob. We owe it to everyone. When I was running as a governor, I didn't know anything. I made them start Bartlet college in my dining room. Two hours every morning on foreign affairs and the military. You can do that. I wasn't, Rob. But you've turned being un-engaged into a Zen-like thing, and you shouldn't enjoy it so much is all, and if it appears at times as if I don't like you, that's the reason why. They're playing my song. In the future, if you're wondering, "Crime. Boy, I don't know" is when I decided to kick your ass. You know the story about... There's a guy down here holding a sign that says, "Eight more years." Don't get me wrong, I like your thinking, but I've probably tested the Constitution about as far as Abbey's going to allow me to for a little while.  We need to find energy alternatives. We're getting our cue. We're getting it right now. The Republicans are busy. They're trying to convince us that they care about new energy and that they're not in the vest pockets of big oil, and that's a tough sell. I don't envy them, 'cause their only hope is that we don't notice that they're the ones who are filling the hole with water every night, and I think Americans are smarter then that. I think we noticed. This isn't a time for people whose doomsday scenario is a little less at the pump for Texaco and Shell. This isn't a time for people who say there aren't any energy alternatives, just because they can't think of any. This is a time for American heros, and we reach for the stars. Captain, good to see you. Good morning. They had exposure in the fund? I'm amazed it's only down 270. That's what you want to say to me? Driscoll announced it was filling, and Jennings and DWA were in the fund. It's against the law to campaign on a military base. No, legally. These army guys are DRF-1. They're division ready. They can be deployed in two hours. These navy guys are going to deploy overseas for six months. C- bag and M-16, they're on a C-130 going where ever I tell them. And that's when their wives are told. I don't want to screw around with them. Yeah. Good morning. We haven't meet. I'm your Commander in Chief. This is the greatest fighting force in the history of the world, and I want to tell you why. So what will I remember? What will I tell my grandchildren? I'll tell them that I stood on the Great Wall of China, and that I stood in the well of the U.S. House of Representitives. I'll tell them that I sat with kings and cardinals and made an appointment to the Supreme Court, and I'll tell them that one morning in September I got to spend a few minutes with the men and women of Air Wing One. God bless you and your families and may he continue to shed his magnificent grace upon the United States of America. How's it going? It feels good. Jennings-Pratt was in the fund? It'll rebound. No kidding, it feels good out here. What are you doing? About what? You don't meet with Fitzwallace about nothing. What? Leo... Yeah, all right. Well, we're coming home now. It's still mostly transportation and technology? Have Josh and Toby weigh in at some point, okay? Yeah? Come on in. Nice to meet you. I's crazy I know, but sometimes the schedule gets so tight that we have to schedule meetings on the plane, so we ask you to fly with us and hit you on the way back. Were you impressed by the plane? It's got an apartment and an operating room. Okay. Well, you've met with Donald McKittridge-- he directs the Office of Presidential Personnel. You had a moment to meet with Charlie Young? He's probably mentioned that this was a job where you to need to be able to hold a lot of names and dates and numbers in your head. You were told what the pay scale was? And some of the perks? Well, for instance, we have our own 747, and it's flown by an Air Force general. Okay, let's talk about your last job. There's a tremendous amount of informatin you need to keep track of: dates, names, number, things I'm not good with. What's that? It's not intellect, it's memory. It's a different gift. A wonderful one. I've never had it. Well... okay, I'll try and find that time, but let's get back to you. What would you say was the most challenging part of working for the Ambassador of France? Mm. I make fun of the French as much as anybody and I don't even know what that meant. Nah, that's okay. I think you're terrific and I appreciate your coming in and talking to us. Thanks again. Yeah. Hey. Please, the market's down 425 points. I know. 425 points represents billions of dollars which aren't there anymore heading into the fourth quarter which is Christmas. What's your good news? You said almost all. Why does Gallup have it a one-point race? Well, one day I'll buy you a beer and you'll tell us all how you did it. Seth Weinberger's assistant has come forward with the information that he was having an affair with a colleague and a newspaper has printed it. You tell me. He'd already stepped down over OSHA. It's been two months. This is an assistant getting her name in the paper and it's unbelievably hurtful to his wife. I don't understand it. I don't understand the paper printed it either, but that's another day. This is terrible. Good. Hmm? Mitch, come on in.  Just rock and roll, Sam. Hey. We have your input. You're talking about the exemption. Developing nations, and I think what's lunacy is a nation of SUV's telling a nation of bicycles, that they have to change the way the live before we'll agree to do something about greenhouse emission. Well, in international law there's a principle called differentiated responsibilties. We're the ones making the greenhouse gas! Mr. Secretary, it's not your job to tell me whose support I'm losing. We have people who do that. It's your job to tell me whose support you just got for me. Okay.  Ed. Whatever. Seth Weinberger's old assistant... I don't think a lot of blind loyalty, but I think a lot less of blind betrayal. Yeah, that's probably why. Could somebody get Leo for me, please? Peter, you hear that? He called you "congressman." You think when your folks got you out in '74, they imagined they were taking you to a place that'd be willing to make you a Congressman? Me too. How's fishing? You catch any marlin? Takes a fisherman to catch one, though, right? Okay, I'm just saying. Leo, meet Congressman Peter Lien, Texas 22nd. Peter, this is Leo McGarry, U.S. Air Force, 144th Fighter Wing. Peter's family fishes in Galveston Bay, but they don't catch marlin. It's a sore spot, and he doesn't like to talk about it. Peter's 34 years old. Ordinarily I would tell you that Jim Coor was a good public servant, and you've got big shoes to fill, and he was and you do, but obviously you have a bigger symbolic responsibilty then that. But you biggest responsibiltity isn't symbolic, right? What is it? Welcome, my freind, to the show that never ends. Isn't that a hell of a thing? What's next? Yeah, it's a proud day for Alfred Nobel. When do you think I say something? Tell me again. Mr. Kieth. I told my granddaughter I was meeting you and I asked what question she wanted me to ask you and she said to ask you of all the presidents you've met, who is your favorite and I assured her that it would be me. Okay, well, I was just kidding, but, sure Truman, if you like that kind of thing. How old were you when you met President Hoover? The 23rd? No, no. It's just... it's... You shook hands with him, and next day the Great Depression started. Okay. Stock market took a stumble today. You know, we'll call it... well, a little bigger than a pre-rally decline. If you watch the news or read a newspaper or really are alive in any way, you're going to hear about it in the next couple of hours. I'm not worried though, 'cause Tokyo opens at 7:00 PM Eastern and Tokyo's going to be my mother's milk tonight. It's in the bag. No. I'm sorry. Sorry, could I just have one second? Charlie? How you doing?  There's a lot of science in economics to be sure but like a lot of things, a lot depends on the user. I need the Nikkei Index to do what I need it to do tonight and I've got Hoover's good luck charm over here. But now, while I'm talking about it, I feel like it's ridiculous that someone like me would consider canceling a photo-op... I'm not, it's momentary. Really? I didn't know you were superstitious. No. Charlie, just out of curiosity, in your mind, how much time do I spend thinking about your desk? How long have we been talking about this now? Okay, let's not tell anybody that. Just scheduling. Thank you. You can't say "faith-based initiatives" to me. You have to be more specific then that. You can't offer a guy a hot meal but first you have to accept God into your heart. It's against the law. It's also a little obnoxious. No, the soup is non-denominational, Fred but I'm not talking about the soup I'm talking about the programs. And another problem is, the government can't subsidize organizations that discriminate in hiring practices as religious organizations are allowed to do. We're going to talk about it around her, but I wouldn't... Okay. I met with two women this morning on the plane. I'm meeting another in a little bit. No. Well, the first one isn't easily impressed. She told me. The second one wasn't funny. Or rather, didn't think I was. She was the secretary to an Ambassador to France. I told her that I'd had dinner with D'Astier at the Elysee Palace. She gently corrected me at that point calling it the Palais de l'Elysee-- for that alone I wanted to sent for a parachute. And I made a joke to D'Astier having to do with cheese and I said that D'Astier was visibly insulted and that he was reconsidering my diplomatic status and she said, "Well, did he?" It didn't bode well for me. A... crazy woman that Charlie knows. Hey, do we have a GPS reading out on Josh and Toby? Have they been sighted? 300 IQ points between them-- they can't find their way home. I swear to God, if Donna wasn't there, they'd have to buy a house. "You've got to be able to keep a lot of names and numbers in your head. Can you do that?" "Oh, I should think so." Oh, should you? Okay, well, I'm going interview a few more people, in the meantime, you can get your ass back on the cover of the The New Yoker where it belongs. A third one. Charlie say that I don't want anyone to replace her. I don't know, Sam. I'm a puzzle. This Seth Weinberger thing makes me crazy. Well, it's an election year, Bill. We'd rather people didn't exercise common sense but I agree with what you're saying. Yes? Really? All right. Hi. You two know each other? You're the alpaca farmer You hired Charlie, huh? I didn't know that. Well, thanks for that. Who was in second place? Who did I almost get? I like to think about the road not taken. Yeah. David Dweck? Yeah. Thanks. Sorry. Why were you fired? Why were you fired? That doesn't sound quite right. Why were you fired? Only because you're asking for a job. I don't belive you. No, it's not. Yes. Charlie said it was because of him. He said you hired him and that's why you got fired. No he doesn't. I'm now ordering you to tell me why you were fired. You were strange the first time I met you, and you're strange now. What? Okay. Tell me why you were fired. I'm going to figure it out anyway. What I lack in memory, I more than make up for with exceptional powers of deductive reasoning. All right. I think the interview's over. Thank you very much. Brian Dweck, CFO of Colfax and contributor to Representative Mark McKittridge whose brother is the Director of the White House Office of Presidenial Personnel, wants a job for his son, David-- "Wants a Dwink of WaWa." My powers of deduction are not to be mocked. She didn't tell me anything. I ordered her to, and she... By the way, my powers of ordering are a joke. I can create an agency, but I can't get her to... She didn't give you up. She, um... she didn't give you up. Have the agents stop her at the door a second. Debbie. Where's the dollar? What's the dollar doing right now? Bring her on. Is the Frist Lady inside? Suppertime. Medea, you home? "Political experts seemed surprised by the Bartlet campaigns decision to position their candidate against motherhood. Said one spokesperson..." What? No, don't do this. About what? How?  What the hell are you... It was benign. It was totally benign what you said. These women are out of their minds. We're laughing about it here. I'm telling... Turn on C.J.'s press briefing. She's been doing 20 minutes up there. They're booking her into Ceasar's. No. Ah, you pulled the switcheroo. You deceived me. You played upon my love for you. Yeah. I hired someone today. Yeah. Her name is Debbie Fiderer. She used to work here. Used to be DiLaGuardia. Yeah. She doesn't scare you a little?  No. Okay, I'm getting dressed for the thing. Yeah. ...restoring abundance amid an economic shortfall, securing peace in a time of global conflict, sustaining hope in this winter of anxiety and fear. More than any time in recent history, America's destiny is not of our own choosing. We did not seek nor did we provoke an assault on our freedom and our way of life. We did not expect nor did we invite a confrontation with evil. Yet the true measure of a people's strength is how they rise to master that moment when it does arive. 44 people were killed a couple of hours ago at Kennison State University. Three swimmers from the men's team were killed and two others are in critical condition. When, after having heard the explosion from their practice facility, they ran into the fire to help get people out. Ran into the fire. The streets of heaven are too crowded with angels tonight. They're our students and our teachers and our parents and our friends. The streets of heaven are too crowded with angels, but every time we think we have measured our capacity to meet a challenge, we look up and we're reminded that that capacity may well be limitless. this is a time for American heroes. We will do what is hard We will achieve what is great. This is a time for American heroes and we reach for the stars. God bless their memory, God bless you and God bless the United State of America. Thank you. The happy fun group. They're just allowed to make things up now? They know it was us right? Is that what you think we should do? Yeah. What about you? I signed a piece of paper, Fitz. You just hated my living guts when I got this job, didn't you? Yeah, you did. I didn't know anything and I didn't have any respect for the Chiefs. You became my counselor and you wrangled the Chiefs and you brought them to me. You brought them to me. And you talked Leo into Shareef and he talked me into it. It was my order and you executed it flawlessly and I stand by it. I stand by you, I stand by you all. I stand by it till I die. Plus, I'm going to need some cell mates in Holland. So, what do we do now? Let's go. Nancy's in her office. There are some calls I asked her to make. Listen, I know we're here for a serious purpose, for a sober purpose, but I wanted to say I've never been a part of a street gang before, and that's basically what we are -- a pretty well-financed one -- but anyway, I wanted to say it feels good, and I think when we're done with this meeting, I think we should go out and get girls, and I don't know, maybe knock over a fruit stand or something. We're going to need to learn to sing and dance. Toby and Josh are back. Toby Ziegler and Josh Lyman missed the motorcade in Indiana yesterday. It's taken them 20 hours to get home. They're walking into DC right now. You're not curious why they're walking into DC? Walking into DC from where I guess you got to ask. Okay, just for that, when it comes time to give out gang nicknames, you're going to be... I don't know, but you're not going to have a good nickname. Ellie had a teacher named Mr. Pordy, who had no interest in nuance. He asked the class why there's always been conflict in the Middle East and Ellie raised her hand and said, "It's a centuries old religious conflict involving land and suspicions and culture and..." "Wrong." Mr. Pordy said, "It's because it's incredible hot and there's no water." (to Leo) I'm hunkered down. I'm going to East Lansing. We're going to need a lawyer. I don't know. It's a seven-ten split. Can you work on it a while? I'm going to call Leo. I'll be in my office.  How's it going? Is she there? Casper's here, he's going to talk to me. I'll send him to you next, all right? I don't know. I still have about two minutes. "The bullying nature of the intrusive and invasive government of the United States has to be rendered quickly and decisively a wake-up call. And this opportunity..." What do you think of this letter? No. Is it credible? You guys think it was sent by the bomber? We think there's a group. The end of the letter promises more. Unless what? That's where I'm confused. All right, what do you have? Yes, plus once we catch a perpetrator, you don't need to track him down. I think I'm just going to talk for a little bit. Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you. "Joy cometh in the morning," scripture tells us. I hope so. I don't know if life would be worth living if it didn't. And I don't yet know who set off the bomb at Kennison State. I don't know if it's one person or ten, and I don't know what they want. All I know for sure, all I know for certain, is that they weren't born wanting to do this. There's evil in the world. There'll always be, and we can't do anything about that. But there's violence in our schools, too much mayhem in our culture and we can do something about that. There's not enough character, discipline, and depth in our classrooms. There aren't enough teachers in our classrooms.  There isn't nearly enough, not nearly enough, not nearly enough money in our classrooms, and we can do something about that. We're not doing nearly enough, not nearly enough to teach our children well. And we can do better, and we must do better, and we will do better. And we will start this moment today! They weren't born wanting to do this. What else? What's wrong with that? Oh, for the love of Mike. Look, win or lose on the 5th, I'm the President right now, right? Six -- look, six of the girls were exactly Zoey's age. Tell the Chancellor's office that if it'll make his life easier, I'll sit in row 19 and you'll keep out the press. This has to be about the students and the families, and Ritchie and I are simply going to have to summon the humanity to keep this from being a political event. How did you do with Jordan? Yeah? Yeah. Yeah. All right. In the meantime, what do we do have by way of stalling tactics? We ought to be good at that. State thinks he had a friendly relationship with the West. Shareef is now alive and well and living in Libya? All right. Come back and tell me how we do it. Blind men. "The one-eyed man is king in a world of blind men." Yes, please. What do you know? The internet has been a phenomenal tool for hate groups. Don't pipe bombs usually kill two or three people? How is it so many yesterday? No. Thanks. Ten of those under the bleachers at a basketball game? Okay. Charlie? In ascending order of age, would you get my daughters on the phone, please? Thank you. What's going on? Allergy medicine? Tractor starter fluid doesn't kill you? You think these might be our guys? We have reason to believe they're connected KSU? Are there kids inside? All right. Let's get the Director and the Attorney General. We only go in on my order, okay? It'll be my order. You just knew it was going to end up like this. Allergy medicine and tracker fluid we're getting high on now. Is this going to get ridiculuos? We'll see it Al Jazeera? No disinformation to U.S. press, right? We don't give disinformation to the American press? Unless it's about my health? All right, let's go. All this posturing is a preamble to something. Why not? Hey Jordan. What do you think? What do you think? Yeah. That makes three of us. Take all the time you want. You done yet? Well, that makes us ground-breaking, doesn't it? More ground-breaking. Due respect, Ms. Kendall, I'm the last person to whom that needs to be pointed out. And Article 51 of the United Nations charter says every nation has a right to wage war to defend itself. Wars don't work like that anymore. 44 people are dead in Iowa, and most them college kids. Shareef has murdered Americans in uniform. He's murdered Americans out of uniform. He was trying to blow up the Golden Gate Bridge, and I didn't have time to file an amicus brief. I don't know, I'm working on that. Why? Well, that's what I was hoping you'd say. I want there to be justice. That's why I'm talking to lawyer. Anyway, I just came in to say hello. Charlie? I'm heading back to the residence. Oh, God. Yeah. Arsenic? No. Why couldn't you have stopped with "I sincerely apologize?" Your argument is totally fuhkakta by the way. The World Bank has a $17 billion budget contributed by a hundred... Uh, it doesn't matter. Don't worry about it. Yeah. You can keep the job. Why, because you knock me out, that's why. "Let's stick some arsenic into President Bartlet's drinking water and see if he delegates responsibility to the World Bank then." President Bartlet. You reffered to me and to the office with respect. You're a class act.  Whack job. Treasury scored it? OMB says it's revenue nuetral? NEC, DPC, the advisors? Joint tax on the Hill? All right. All right. Let's line up validators. Yeah? And update our resumes. What? You're doing the face. They've always been iffy about me in Maine. I don't know why. Heroin addicts? Whatever. Let's worry about if Stackhouse does something. Anything else? Why do we think the boy is sick? How do you do it? Why? You hear that? Where's the table? All right. We should do it. Let's get the kid. Good luck, everybody. Good luck, Casper. What's going on? Leo, they did it. Casper's boys. One suspect... you should tell him. Wounded in the leg. That's it. Our guys are fine. And? Come on, and... He's... Univerisy Hospital. Stable condition. Mike, pick yourself out a daughter. My oldest is married, but I can have it annulled. The Pope said he'd do it, I swear to God. Jerry, ws that note anything I need? Where did it originate? Okay. Somebody will keep me posted. Mike? No kidding, thank you. Yeah, call that play on first down again, Coach 'cause I'm sure they're not ready for it this time. You know, if you ask a professional athlete what the hardest thing is to do in sports, they'll all say "hit a baseball." But a coach once told me that the hardest thing to do in sports is to walk into your Super Bowl locker room at half-time and change the strategy that got you there 'cause it's no longer working. It's not even the number of debates, as much as the format. 2 minute response followed by a 1 minute reply. That's not a debate. That's not a debate! It's a joint press conference. Nice job on the Red Mass. First rate.You don't mind if I change everything, do you? Here... here... and I added a section here. It's a joint press conference. It's not neccesary for the candidates to be in the same room. That part's just theater. Be nice to be able to respond to what the other person has said, and ask them a question. And the moderator should be empowered to press for an answer, just as a judge can of a witness, or a member of Congress in a confirmation hearing. Cicero wanted to restore the overthrown king of Egypt, and the Roman Senate debated all day and into the night, every military and diplomatic consequence until they collapsed on the Senate floor. Lentulus is trying to overthrow the Republic. Ceaser goes up against Cato-- by the way, in the very first public debate on the death penalty. They were against each other, it was a debate and they explored the meaning of spirituality and suffering. That's right, but my point... Why not, what? We'd never get it. The Ritchie people wold put up too much of a fight. Other then this House, we don't have anything else they want. Wow. Isn't this exactly why casino's don't play with a one-deck shoe? Hmm... He's still running that screen pass. Get Toby to sign off, and I'm in. This is going to be interesting. Do I need my speech? And so how isn't it a Constitutional issue? It is, but sometimes you say, "Big deal." It was the intention not to have a national religion, not to have anyone's religious views imposed on anyone else, and not to have the government encourage a national display of piety as a substitute for real action. I'll be in the office a minute. Thank you. I didn't write much of it. That part I wrote. I added it. You did, Howard. You did all the time. No. C.J.? Would it be possible to move the press off the church grounds? I'm going to take questions for a little while. Needle exchange. Affirmative action and quotas are about two different things. Affirmative action is about providing people an opportunity they might not otherwise get. What that hell is...? I don't support racial profiling. Why? 'Cause bite me, that's why. It's been almost four years Sam, how long do you want to say "I told you so?" What wrong with "bite me?" I think she was talking to me there, Dexter. What? I'm against it. How you doing there Joey? Kippy? Okay. Is that what you were saying, Andy? I do know what my position is. Excuse me... Were you doing me just then? You were doing me. Anybody else do a pretty good Bartlet? It's talent night here at Debate Camp, anybody want to do a little skit? Apparently, eight Israeli Thunder fighters--these are also known as American-made Boeing F15E Strike Eagles--have hit two terrorist bases in the north and south of Qumar. And while no Qumari government personel or institutions were destroyed, Qumar, of course, considers an attack on its soil to be an act of war. So we are, as always, one bad bottle of Tequila away from all-out war in West Asia. (to Sam) Would you like to take this one or shall I? Okay. (leaving room) I agreed to be locked up with you people for 48 hours. How much time do I have left? Defense condition three for the bases in Qumar is what? What's happening on the ground? That was fast. Alright. Well, we've got ourselves a Marx Brothers' movie. You have the order. Oh, Fitz. How're you doing? Well, we've made camp in North Carolina for prep, so I've been thinking about killing myself, but let me ask you something. Besides Qumar, Iran, Syria, Hezbullah, they've all got short and medium-range missiles. If Israel feels threatened by them, what happens? Well, for the moment, they haven't stood up, but in the meantime, let's think of something we can give them when they do. (warning tone) Leo... Honey, if we're going to have this fight, can we not do it in front of the Joint Chiefs? It just scares the hell out of them. Mr. Chairman, would you put our bases in Qumar at Defense Condition 3 with the U.S. Military at Defcon Four? Thank you. Four years ago, on January 15th, Toby, Josh, and Sam are in Bartlet's temporary office. Leo walks inside. (enters) We got Rooker. Well, that's an extraordinary and unsurprisingly dumb interpretation of what it is my administration's trying to accomplsh. It's hard enought to rasie kids today with help from family leave, subsidized daycare, preschool-- we need more of it, not less. I have three grown daughters, Governor. You really want to tell me how I should raise my family? You're really comfortable with that? You want to tell other American fathers and mothers what they're doing wrong? I didn't think you did. So, why don't we stick to what government can do-- which is collect money and distribute it-- and stop wasting time by sentimentalizing family. Who are you now? That wasn't the question, Larry. The question was, "What do I have against families?" and the answer is I have nothing against them at all. They simply aren't mentioned in the Executive Powers section. TWO DAYS AFTER INAUGURATION It's nice. What are we doing right now? They'll loan stuff? Really? I want Apollo 11. Then don't bother me. I'm meeting with the leadership, I'm signing six Executive Orders I don't yet understand... God, I thought that was a closet. All right, the rooms got four doors, it's huge. Do you understand them? C.J., what are you doing?  He's standing right there. Would you get your ass in here? Could everyone stop acting strange? Yeah. Law enforcement? It's our second day, how do you think it's going so far? Yes. FIVE DAYS AFTER INAUGURATION Thanks for coming down. They turn around the ship in exchange for what? They're arming the Bahji, Leo. Two training camps of which the Israelis just attacked. I've gotta turn around the boat-- tonight. Tomorrow we'll worry about tomorrow. Look... Fitz? What about Nancy? What's available from the Sixth Fleet? Stop the boat. Don't shoot it unless I tell you to. Hey. Did you have a good day? You know what I remember he said to me? He said, "Mr. President, when I hear black footsteps behind me, I'm scared. When I hear white footsteps, I'm not." You pay for these things for such a long time. Too long, don't you think? We made a mistake... I corrected it. I'll make more. Am I going to lose New Hampshire? I don't mind blowing the knucklehead stuff like Rooker... Rooker's not knucklehead, but... if I'm making mistakes there, how do I know I'm not doing it when it comes to matters like death and destruction? All right. When we're done tonight, we should talk about moving money to Ohio. Not anymore. He's dead. Let's go. And stay up in my face, okay? I swear to God, the winner of this debate's going to be the next President. Anybody want to be on the losing team? Then let's pump it up. Let's go, Claudia Jean. Ten words. Ten words. All right, let's do a drill. Too much money for too little protection. Next. That would offer some children a choice of better schools, but I haven't given up the ghost on better schools for everybody, and vouchers drain money from that goal. First of all, it's important to understand the President doesn't make that decision, though he appoints the Supreme Court Justices who do so. What... any... um... All right, I'm not going to say that. I'll just go right to... No, I don't. I think you know that I'm opposed....  Let's not do that. I haven't seen any evidence that it's a deterrent, and there are more effective... In my state... What? Let's go-- ten bucks. Crisis of confidence.  You did one square foot of real estate. Ten bucks for you.  And you-- You big bear, come to me. I'm going to kiss you right on the mouth. Work hard. Hey. No, I decided to go ahead and wear my lucky tie. Yeah. Then it's your lucky tie. Why don't you get mine, and we'll go to the plane? Listen, what do you say I sit in on this meeting for a few minutes. We've got time. All right. Okay. I guess what I don't understand is this. Have I ever exhibited any evidence that I'd be mad if a tie got ruined? No, I'm not that guy. The chemicals at the Dry cleaner don't know that. Josh? My daughters are here? Well, I don't approve of that. I don't approve of that, either. Remember the tie Josh had to give me at the last minute? There was a lot of juice in that tie. It was like in the last seconds. Just the energy getting me out on stage... Yeah. I got to go. Okay. Why are you telling me this now? Oh, my God. You're insane. Are you...? You're insane! Charlie! My wife cut it off with scissors. I don't think we have that kind of time, Josh.  Well, first of all, let's clear up a couple of things. "Unfunded mandate" is two words, not one "big word."  There are times when we're fifty states and there are times when we're one country, and have national needs. And the way I know this is that Florida didn't fight Germany in World War II or establish civil rights. You think states should do the governing wall-to-wall. That's a perfectly valid opinion. But your state of Florida got $12.6 billion in federal money last year-- from Nebraskans, and Virginians, and New Yorkers, and Alaskans, with their Eskimo poetry. 12.6 out of a state budget of $50 billion, and I'm supposed to be using this time for a question, so here it is: Can we have it back, please? Actually, what you've done in Florida is bring the right together with the far right. And I don't think Americans are tired of partisan politics; I think they're tired of hearing career politicians diss partisan politics to get a gig. I've tried it before, they ain't buying it. That's okay, though. That's okay, though, 'cause partisan politics is good. Partisan politics is what the founders had in mind. It guarantees that the minority opinion is heard, and as a lifelong possessor of minority opinions, I appreciate it. But if you're troubled by it, Governor, you should know, in this campaign, you've used the word "liberal" seventy-four times in one day. It was yesterday.  No, the question is: Should we focus on 90% of the kids, who go to public school, or give parents money from the public-school budget to send their kids to private school at a time when private schools are even turning kids away who can afford it? Public schools are going to be the best schools in the country. They're gonna be cathedrals. The answer is a change in the way we finance schools! There it is.  That's the ten-word answer my staff's been looking for for two weeks. There it is. Ten-word answers can kill you in political campaigns. They're the tip of the sword. Here's my question: What are the next ten words of your answer? Your taxes are too high? So are mine. Give me the next ten words. How are we going to do it? Give me ten after that, I'll drop out of the race right now. Every once in a while... every once in a while, there's a day with an absolute right and an absolute wrong, but those days almost always include body counts. Other than that, there aren't very many unnuanced moments in leading a country that's way too big for ten words. I'm the President of the United States, not the President of the people who agree with me. And by the way, if the left has a problem with that, they should vote for somebody else. You'll be back. Better than if I won my home state but lost my home country. The only poll that matters closes in 17 hours. Title 63, Chapter 659, Section 43 of New Hampshire election code says electioneering is prohibited within a corridor ten feet wide and extending a distance from the entrance door of the building as determined by the moderator where the election is being held. If anyone knows what that means... Yeah, I voted for the bond issue. It's going to improve public education without a tax abatement. Well, one way or another I imagine we'll be talking tonight. I got to get back. You can hockle Abbey for awhile. She's taking the next plane. Yeah. Listen, you think you could score me a couple of aspirin? I'm fine. No, it's just a headache. Just me and you today, okay. I'm fine. I'll sign these in the car. Come on. Okay, this can wait. Let's go. RITCHIE : 16,864 RITCHIE  31,117 Hello. Hi. What's going on? What was wrong with the old way? What was wrong with the old way? How? I hear you've got rules for meetings. You don't think that's apt to create a resentment among the people who were here before with...? It's not like the thing wasn't working with... Whatever you may assume, that wasn't a rube sitting out there, Debbie. She ran the Oval Office for two years and a state house before that. What if, instead of you, I want a dial tone? Why? You're going to place a lot of my outgoing calls... I can make my own phone call. Don't be... I can make my own phone calls. That's good. That's a good idea. No. I'm sorry about that. Debbie... I have to ask you. Are we talking about...? Did you bring it up 'cause you... noticed...? Is there some particular thing today you noticed? No, please. I was talking about something else. Line one is you? Thanks. RITCHIE : 41,374 RITCHIE : 41,484 RITCHIE : 43,210 I feel like I should be self-deprecating. I mean, it's not inauguration. I could be funny, right? I don't thibk so. I think it's the wrong note. If I'm thanking campaign staff, maybe. What are you doing? What? What? RITCHIE : 53,710 Halfway aroung the world in Bosnia and Chechnya and Rwanda, they dream of the promise we fulfilled today of a future we chose, for ourelves, together. Four years ago, we were joined by our highest ideals, by our best hopes, and tonight we're joined by the same commitment to open new doors of oppurtunity and justice. To ensure that the promise of the country is the birthright of all the people. We've achieved so much together always believing, always knowing that America could be made new again and so it was, and so it will be again. God bless you all. God bless the United States of America. That was fun. I feel great. No, I'm fine. Yeah.  How'd you know? Just for a minute at the end. I couldn't see it. Yeah, I know. We can still have tonight, though, right? All right. I don't want to intimidate you, but it turns out I'm the first Democrat in twenty years to make a clean sweep of the Plains states and I'm not just talking about Iowa and Nebraska. Yeah. I won the Dakotas. The Badlands. The Black Hills. But let's go down, way down, to the Deep South and the humid bayou of Louisiana and its nine electoral votes. What manner of man it must take to win the state, which, by the way, is the only one operating under the Napoleonic Code of France and I still don't know what that's all about, but back to me... Who's your Commander in Chief? Yes. And do the ladies like him? Oh, yes. To the tune of 58%. Yeah? I thought we had an understanding with regard to tonight and interruptions, Charlie. I thought we were men. Sam needs to see me? It's like what, 1:00 in the morning? Well, let's send him in. Good to see you. No, what would make you say that? No, no, you could have and I'm not going to take any chances, so let's do it now. I know. Yeah. Am I. Then, I'm behind you 100%. Man, is everything all right? Yeah, look, honey, Sam stopped by. Eyes front, mister. You sure you're okay? Okay. Yeah. Thank you. As you can see, we've moved on to the caviar course. I know how you do. Stoli Cristall, the most elegant of vodkas. The caviar itself is a product of my advice at the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species. We passed a much more stringent bill against the poaching of Caspian Sea sturgeons. California white sturgeon from the Stillman Sea Farm in Elverta. Only the best. Oh, I think you're going to find... Excuse me. How you doing? Okay. Anyone else? Yeah. You're young, Charlie. Don't you want to be having fun right now? I get that a lot. Leo. Yes? Thank you. What happened? The Americans? Yeah. Well, we kind of knew it was going to be like this. Jordan still here? All right, have a good night. Yeah. Toby! Hi. Listen, I'm kind of in the middle of something. Is this anything that could possibly wait until tomorrow? Well, that's great. Well done. See you tomorrow. (to Toby) I was this close. You should marry that girl, Toby. Wait a second. End of may? Hang on, I'm doing math in my head. Yeah, end of May? Why didn't you tell us until now? Yeah, but he's got one. Really? It's my Catholicism, Toby. It works for me. And her. Did you break any laws? Then a blessing on your house, young man. Mazel tov. Okay. Let's go. Well, the votes have been counted and the people have spoken, and it's clear that their will is for me to be able to do and have anything I want. There's a new guy from AP? Well the President of Turkmenistan just officially extended the date of adolescence to twenty-five. So, things like that. That's just greedy. Real power is knowing when to leave a little something on the table. It's a big country, Arnold. Debbie! Where the hell, first of all, are you and where are my... Ipswich clams don't come from Chesapeake Bay, they come from Ipswich! Have her beheaded for my birthday! Good morning. I don't care. As long as I'm keeping this one. You bet your ass it is. Which, by the way, I can pat anytime I want now. The voters have spoken. Lowest inflation in twenty years. Housing starts are cyclical, which is the thing.  What do you got? FEMA's on the ground? All right. I know my people. Thank you.  Don't get me wrong, Mark. I think January's a good month... Yeah? It's called penmanship, Watson. Something your generation wouldn't know about because of the computers. How many of these things am I doing? How many have I done? Three? Your system's slowing me down. You're kidding. Hey, can't we have color coding and stickers priority list? Can I get a little bureaucracy going here? I'm doing basically what the President does. Ask people for things, then thank them for things. Let's go.  Take the calls to the mansion. I'll meet you there after this. We had a couple of cats when the kids were kids named Mr. Finch and Ms. Wilburforce or something-- I can't remember-- but... Really? Okay, well, I can't believe my kids didn't think to ask you what to name the cats. But they used to bring mice into the house and show 'em to me. This is how I'm starting to feel about the Swiss. Good morning. Tell me about the boy. 11:45? That's eleven minutes from now. This meeting's a little premature, isn't it? We should wait ten minutes. This meeting doesn't go in the Sit Room anymore, okay? I don't know why the hell it's here. This isn't a military operation. My office is a secure room, too, isn't it? Please, somebody tell me it is, or I gotta go pack some stuff. You see my point? I'm sorry, that sounded funny to me. I'm the kid in bio who laughed all the time. Coach? How old is he? How old is he? Fifteen. The Shiites, Manny, that's what you want me to take back to my thoracic-surgeon wife? Get this boy in preop. Somebody tell the Swiss to stop standing in the damn doorway with a mouse in their mouth. If they're coming in, come in. No, 'cause we're all in a secure room except for the Ayatollah's staff, a Swissair pilot, and four hundred other people. Mr. Finch and Mrs. Wilberforce. There's nothing wrong with my memory. Though those are stupid names, and there's something wrong with my kids. No kidding, you want to crash a space probe into Neptune. That's fine with me. I think we've crashed into most of the planets but $2.5 billion, okay? If we're going to fail, I want to do it on budget. You know what? Why don't you tell Debbie we're going to do some calls? Yes, calls. Calls. Mr. Sarcasm, with your dry... "Calls." I was this close to renaming one of the oceans after you but no way. Maybe... maybe, one of the species of fish, like trout.  "Trout" is now 'charlie.' Went up to the lake, pulled out a couple of nice charlie for dinner. Look at the size of that charlie you've got mounted on your wall! What have you got? Yeah? Heart and lung. Knew about it? We did it. What kind? What's the room saying? Can't do it now. We're not going to not do it. I'm saying just now. Hi. Before you say anything, here's my idea: the kid needs lungs and a heart. Let's use the Ayatollah's. What are you smiling at? "The Iranians, they've taken to the streets." Perfect. That goes to the Margaret Museum. Ah, bite me. Please. He didn't want to try, "My son is dying and these guys maybe can fix him? And maybe if our citizens didn't spend quite so much energy denouncing the infidels, they'd have time to build a damn medical school!" Okay, but just tell me they weren't using cellular technology, 'cause I don't care what anybody says, it doesn't work yet. What do you mean? He's going to say no. No. No. Come on! That's a fifteen-year-old non-combatant on his way to a hospital. I want you to pretend that plane's got a big red cross on it. I understand. Send the communiqué, absolutely. There's a Bahrain Agreement that says... send it. Tell them to stop. Don't even come close... I don't even want a scent of linkage to it. A big damn red cross right on that plane. Laney says the plane's still six hours out. What are you talking about? Where's he? It's in Pakistan, what does it matter? Okay, but if I need a life-saving procedure, can you make sure the surgeon's suffering from massive oxygen deprivation? Aw, don't tell me. The one guy who can save his son and he tortured his father. That's just bad staff work. Charlie! Are we sure about Japan? I mean, one of these days they're going to find the fairway, right? Would you pull the First Lady out of whatever she's in right now? Well, put on a helmet and pads and get in there. That's it. Hey, Terry. Yeah. No need to thank me. Whatever happened to Mrs. Wilburforce? Really? What they hell are you talking about? Wasn't Mrs. Wilberforce our cat? Really? All right. Eisenmenger's Syndrome. The Ayatollah's son has it. No, but I'm concerned about spousal abuse. The only doctor available won't do it. Persian. Abbey... I can't order him to do it. Through the power vested in me by you? Just for the record, this is why we don't talk about foreign policy. Which we do, and you don't think we do it enough. Because Samuel Mudd was tried and convicted of treason for setting that leg. What 'so'? The patient right in front of them? All right. Go back to the sewing thing. "The boy's on the plane. He's experiencing pulmonary hypertension." That's elevated pressure in the lungs, I think. That could lead to what? Doctor, that could lead to what? That cold lead to what? That's what it says here. Follow me. His right ventricular pressure has risen to 102 mm Mercury. That's right, and he has something called in situ thrombi. Dr. Mohebi, I don't care. Why aren't you scrubbing up? I know. Doctor... I know this. Don't you think I know? I'll let you know who the enemy is. That's my job. It's not a 15-year-old boy. Doctors Without Borders. I do know these people. You're crazy if you don't think I do. Doctor... Nothing will happen to them. Nothing will happen to them. Well, the Swiss, I guess. Look, I'll use every power of the office to protect you and your family, of course I will. Can I just say that this is how things change for the better? A world-class surgeon or a schoolteacher in Afjah who questions the ayatollah's divine power. Do me a favor, Doctor, go back to Smith-Lansing and look at the kid, 'cause I think when you do, you're going to scrub up. If you don't, I respect that, and the man made his own bed. Okay? What was your father's name? What'd he teach? Thank you. Get him to Baltimore. Sure. You're the nominee. Is there another Democrat? You're the nominee. And I know how you feel. You like Scott Holcomb? He's terrific. You're going to campaign on prescription drugs? Sam. It's okay to run away from me when you need to. I appreciate that but that's not what I'm talking about. You disagreed with me on Medicare. I remember the meeting right here. Then you wrote a five-page memo. Run towards yourself. I'm wrong about that. Walk. You're not going to be used to your surroundings. You lose, you lose, but if you waste this, I'll kill you. I'll just kill you, Sam. Anything else? Hey. Yeah. I'm going to bed. Spill it. I didn't line up... I said thanks on the behalf of the ticket. I can't help it if... They'll thank whatever they want. I'm freezing it for us. We just won four more years. It's not time for a free-for-all. Do I call them all back? All right. Yeah. All right. Anything else? Well, Mohebi's day just started. Yeah, that's right. What's up? Uh-huh. I am a character in this story? I don't see being a character. Thank you. Hey. Could have gone better. I didn't think adultery was against the uniform code. Yeah. It's against military law? They told her to stop? What can she get? For failure to follow an order? We shold have that here. Good morning, Mr. Secretary, ladies and gentlemen and welcome to the final Cabinet meeting of Bartlet one. I don't know if this is true, but a Presidential historian told me that this was the most stable cabinet since Hoover's. Which is nice, but you got to think, how many other jobs were really available? But here are facts. You created over nine million new jobs, and the highest home-ownership rate on record. More than 150 new trade agreements. You created the largest expansion of college aid since the GI Bill. Cleaned up over 500 toxic waste dumps. And you did it all while eliminating 16,000 pages of federal regulations. Not bad for government work. Thank you. Okay, thank you.  What the hell is going on with the seats in the briefing room? I'm not worried about it, but I just read about it. I'll comment on it. I'll say sit your ass where you're told and get back to work. Yeah. Thanks. I'm sorry? Okay.  We'll have to return.  Anyway, you're going to take care of it? Well, I'm sorry to hear you caving, but whatever. Well, okay, but still, whatever. Come on in. Thanks.  This is Jack Reese. He's working for Nancy. This is Josh Lyman and C.J. Cregg. They're talking about a force level data-fusion network. Nancy thinks France will come around after the North Sea exercise. You agree? Okay. Thanks very much everybody. Thank you. You're going to talk to Berryhill? He wants to feel loved. You'll make him feel loved? I want him in the Cabinet. Thank you. You think we should get involved? Abbey and the girls? Women? 'Cause I got to tell you, I've been hearing it from Abbey and the girls. What do you think? No, I meant about Vickie Hilton. Sure. Yes, but isn't there some question as to whether it's practical to give that order in the first place? No, I'm just saying there are few side to this. But we'll hear no others because we don't want it in the Oval Office. Okay. Anything else? He's wrong. Leo's wrong. Are we to live with the assumption that there are no men in the services who've commited adultery? I don't know what's worse: being stupid or pretending to be stupid. Tell him that. No, I'm going to do it. Eisenhower and Kay Summersby, a subordinate. Hammond with the wives of two junior officers. So, G.I. Jane gets a court-martial? G.I. Joe gets a short film on hygeine? That is all I have to say to you.  I forgot to tell him something else. That's right. Because men don't give that order to other men. The daughter of the president of Brazil, which presented a politcal prblem for me. Also, I didn't fire him, I asked him to resign. And I set him up in the private sector. And if you think the differnce is semantics, look up dishonorable discharge in there. Look up Fort Leavenworth. Yeah. I read the memo on Rwanda. Average rainfall nine inches. That's the memo Toby wanted me to read? Why?  There are big signs! You can't park there! They should get towed! I hope they get towed to Queens and the Triboro is closed and there's a big craft show at Shea, a flea market or a tractor show! Damn it. Do you really think that Vicky Hilton is unable to distinguish between this order and a combat order? You're right. Well, you didn't let me finish. I may also be right. We get five more people in here, I think we're going to have eight opinions. So let's. And two elections in a row, people said they wanted me to run that. Right now, I'm not talking about overruling anyone or pardoning anyone. Right now, I'm just talking about having people over and asking questions. I like basketball, but I can't play. I don't know why. I played in prep school and I liked being on the team, but I didn't want the ball and the coach said, "Jed, winners always want the ball." I said, "Coach, winners are also better then I am." He said, "Son, to be a winner, you've got to think like a winner." I said, "Coach, to be a winner, you've also got to be better than I am." Anyway, he was right. Winners want the ball. I don't think I ever want to hear it's too sticky for the Oval Office.  What are you smiling at? Are we together on this? Do we have resolve? We've got four years, no election and a Republican Congress that hates me and actually hates you more. You ready to saddle up? All right. Good then. Happy Thanksgiving. There's a new international math and science study. We rank 19 out of 21 countries. This is what I'm talking about. South Africa and Cyprus. No, you don't. Nor us anymore, for that matter. One-third of all math teachers and half of science teachers didn't major or minor in that subject. And we'll want to get to the bottom of that. But we're increasing education spending to over a $100 billion a year and, as a result, we have seventh grade textbooks being used in ninth grade and the same answers get a higher score on S.A.T.s. Right. But I'm talking about children now. On the S.A.T.s? You don't want to know. I got 800/790. For the life of me, I can't imagine what I got wrong. Then I took them again, and got 800/790. I mean, is it possible there was some sort of number-two pencil anomaly that could've...? Yeah, I know, it's a little... something. So our schools have reached a crisis and our infant mortality rate is two and a half times what it is in Singapore. So what I think we should do for starters is, we should keep more people alive, then send them to school. Get a little peace and prosperity going. Stanley, the width and depth of what I haven't done about it yet... You know you can't do anything about hurricanes? The President can't do anything about nature or bad luck. I ought to be able to do something about the airplane. Wait, what'd I just say? What do airplanes signify? Really. Stanley, I never thought to ask, but you are a doctor, right? Yeah. I've been spacing out for a minute at meetings. Three times this week. I hear someone talking and realize I wasn't listening to part of it. Very. Hi. Yeah.  It's Leo. What's going on? Why? And now we're one-third of the way through an Agatha Chrstie story.  "Where nobody be goin' nowhere. The bridge is washed out." Well, I'm finished. But I was doing the guy that says that in the Agatha Christie stories. Stanley, as always. Leo, I'll be in the office. Yeah? It's not that cold. Charlie. I want to see Josh in his office. Let him know I'm coming. Listen, this is going to sound crazy but Olympia Buckland had an infant mortality bill that we asked her not to take out of committee 'cause it was too expensive. I'd like her initiative or something similiar to be folded into the HHS budget. No, I mean I want it for the next Congress. You understand what I'm saying? A little bit, yeah. If we nip and tuck in different departments we can do it. It'll take an around-the-clock kind of effort. Yes it's a holiday, but OMB works for us, right? You think this is crazy? ? Thank you. Toby here yet? So, finally we meet. Want to come in? Okay. Well, I sent some notes on the Congressional section. Isn't that why you're here? To see me. I thought it was about the notes on the Congressional section. Okay. Would you like to come back with Toby? Well, thanks for stopping by. He's the best-looking person I've ever seen in real life. Oh, would you? Yeah, that was a setback for the Bourbons. Listen... Zoey, I think it's really sweet that you still come to me for permission. You're classy, and you're old-fashioned. Not in a million years. Listen. Sit down for a second. When you were little, like two, I really wanted you to like me and I wan't sure you did. With Liz and Ellie, my act just worked and with you I had to try harder. I did something a few months ago and I'm sure I was right and I'd do it again but it's hard to live with. This is ridiculous. You're freezing. Come inside. Come inside. You know, why don't you go back to the Residence and make sure your mom hasn't killed your boyfriend. Yeah, he can come to Manchester. He's going to have more Secret Service stuff to do, and he's going to have to sleep in the root cellar which, like your bedroom door, will be guarded round the clock by two U.S. Marshals. I almost told her. I've been feeling it a little lately. I've been exorcising my guilt by having Josh crowbar infant mortality money into the HHS budget on December 23 at 8:00. How's it going? Yeah. Yeah. We'll figure it out. Stanley thought it was weird that I took the SAT's again, too. You don't think it's possible that the remaining answer was important? Really? How the hell would you know? You got 1400. Yeah, send them in. Yeah. Listen, my reasons for not wanting to talk about campaign reform at the Inauguration are simple. It's not a legislative speech and when we cite issues, it should be the ones that affect people's lives. You agree? Anything else? Not very well so far. Okay, except when I asked you to come into the Oval Office you said, "No, no, no. No, no, no, no." And you called me Mr. Justice. It's the curse of every daughter's father. I don't like them. I don't like them at all. What the hell happened with you two? It was perfect. I just kept you in the office all the time. That was the point. If I was trying to make her happy, I'd buy her a Cabriolet. C-Jean. Stable economies with free-flowing uranium don't make for a stable world community. Did I make that point? Good. And is there a cow on my schedule today?  I'm meeting with a cow. I shouldn't worry about it. I like your sass. What, are you touring?  Am I right on time? How you doing? Good to see you. Great. Thank you. Thanks for coming. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you. Good to see you. How are you? How are you?   How are you today? We live in an interdependent world and we should act like it. We live in a global community and we should sustain it. We should cross borders. We should cross borders to build sustainable democracies that can banish privation and fear. And we should cross borders to bring food and medicine and roads and schools and teachers to parts of the world forgotten by all but the warlords. We're gonna pass this Foreign Ops bill. This should be a century of hope and prosperity everywhere. And America is going to lead the world and not just bully it. Thank you.  What the hell is going on?  What the hell is going on? Which is why we can't get her on the phone? We have many, many backup plans in the works? Josh has broken people into teams and they're developing and executing rapid-response backup plans? Oh, my God. Please, my daughter's dating a kid who's better-looking than my wife. I have only so much RAM to give over to-- C.J.! I'm sorry, but once again, there's a cow? Yeah, I got that part. It was... And that's great. But a picture of me and a cow... Why did you agree to it in the first place? Abbey set it up? Well, good luck with that. Now turn around casually and tell me if Le Vicomte de Valvert has got his hands anywhere near anyone who's related to me.  Zoey! Yeah, I think you'd respond if I stopped feeding you! Charlie. There are a couple of thousand miltary families on food stamps. I can't stand it; the Pentagon knows it. Some families are eligible, some aren't. To change it, they'd have to raise everyone's pay, which they can't do, and this memo's a reminder. It's a get-off-our-backs memo. And you thought you were done with turf wars. You decommissioned two aircraft carriers. No. Boy, Zoey's growing up nicely, isn't she? I'm on your side in this thing, but just barely. Just by a little bit, because he's French and royal. These are very special, very limited circumstances under which we're allies, you and I. You still got it? The letter from the rope line. Put it in my bag tonight. Mr. McGarry, Mr. Ziegler, Mr. Lyman, Ms. Cregg. It's the Tepmtations. I love you guys. Hit me. Million? For an RV? What's he want? I like it. There should a button on my desk I can press and 49 people instantly pray for me. How'd it work out? Well, that's the problem. Yes. Okay, well, good news. Keep us posted on that. Is there something I should be doing I'm not doing? Oh, wait. You guys didn't come in here to tell me something funny?  You... you, are the wildcard, my friend, because you... ...because you will throw out the baby, the bathwater, and the bubbles at curtain time if it means... Feel free to interrupt. I don't care if they care! I care! And oh, by the way, so do you! Toby? Well, in my faith, we've known it's worked for two thousand years. I never knew there was data available, but okay. No. Maxine. Oh, I don't care. But what I was going to say... You're not willing to toss it overboard to win. You're willing to toss it overboard to avoid disappointing Leo. You know what the difference is between you and me? I want to be the guy. You want to be the guy the guy counts on. We know. And work down? If we can get it. When I lose, I don't look for consolation in the score and I know for sure you don't. So, it's what we should do, right? All right, tough beat. It's an unbelievably tough beat. Hey, Zoey's growing up very nicely, isn't she? Anything else? Tough beat, everybody. Thanks for the work. Next time, we let Josh do it the way he wants. Bill Haley? Okay. When's this thing with the cow? Okay. You think? I don't know. I don't know everybody. C.J. wants to cancel the goat picture. Half the world's people live on less than two dollars a day. 130 million will never step inside a schoolhouse. Ingredients for bombs can be purchased at hardware stores and we've just given the Third World what the doctor ordered: rollbacks. Heifer International... they give free cows and goats to people who need milk? Well, then, I don't think that we're in any position to be snotty. Let's do it... Let's do it right now. I'm not standing in this picture alone. This was a total team failure. Stand where you want, but I want my Chief of Staff and my Chief Political Advisor standing near the goat. Let's go.  Set that clock for 90 days. Why are they talking to me about the order of the balls? Well, that's only going to be clear if we also hand out decoder rings. Listen, it's an Inauguration Ball. Let's enjoy ourselves. Thanks, ladies and gentlemen. You read it? You haven't weighed in. No. Thank you, Claudia. Josh. How much? Yeah. Well, their curiosity will be slacked in about 41 minutes. Listen. I have a problem. All right, two problems. I don't have a bible. I kept changing my mind all week on which bible I wanted to use, and then I finally settled on the George Washington Bible but we ran into a problem with the New York Freemasons, which we don't have time to get into. Yeah. Charlie's out hunting one down, but he's not back yet. Is that true? You think that's a good idea? You sure? Thanks. Thank you. Hi. Yeah, I may need to get a room. No kidding. In the last two minutes, three people have reminded me what Jefferson said in his Inaugural. The problem is that when he said it, your best chance of getting entangled with an ally was by rowboat. Charlie's here. Thank you. Donnie's Motel? They didn't have one in the House Library? Okay. Mr. Chief Justice. What do I do then? And will there be someone who'll tell me when it's time to do that? I do. May I continue?  Can we pull foreign policy up on the prompter?  What's going on? So what? A meter? What are you talking about? "Fear of cancer from asbestos, fuzzy science manifestos." Which one's Will? "America cannot be the world's policeman. America cannot enforce its own values, its own standards across the world. Yet when it's in our clear an vital interests..." We're being candid at least. No kidding. Look, I understand I present a uniform gap, but I want to mean what I say. The Chief Justice wrote a poem. What do you mean? Powdered wigs? You think he stayed to long at the fair? Neither am I. This foreign policy language is ridiculous. What's going on in Khundu? I got a short security cable this morning about civil unrest in the Republic of Equatorial Khundu, and I had to reach for an atlas. I know that now. Two warring tribes? They're being evacuated? Okay. Thank you. Yeah? From where? They do? And they need several days notice? Why? Are they not sure where it is? I'm going to be using the Bartlet Bible. That's at the New Hampshire Historical Society. Yes. Hoping beyond hope. I can't remember your name, but are you asking me out on a date? Okay. No, he was talking to me, your Eminence.  Your Excellency, I got a very sketchy intelligence report on the violence in the capitol about an hour ago. I didn't know that. Yes. No. Yeah? And? I can't? Just as the disciples intended. The Jefferson bible doesn't warp? Probably. Speaking of New Hampshire, don't I own the Bartlet Bible? I know. I bought it. And they won't loan it back to me so that I can be inaugurated? Yeah. His name is really Mr. Cravenly? You're not making that up? Okay, would you tell him that I'd like very much to use my family's Bible, which my family has bought at least twice now. You know, a couple hundred people got killed today in Khundu. The Arkutu control the government and they're killing... I'm sorry? Yeah, mm-hmm. No. Yeah. Ask Bob Slattery to come over here. Yeah. Bobby, what's going on? The Catholic Church has better intelligence than we do? None? How many are dead right now? Estimate. Bobby, I don't want to make noise but I want to see a forced depletion report. I want to know how many we'd lose and I want to do it without going three rounds in the newspaper with Miles Hutchison. Who do we have at the Pentagon who could do this for us? You trust him? Tell him I want to see forced depletion on a peacekeeping force in Khundu. And tell him we'll do our best to keep it away from the Secretary's office. Thank you. Hey, I changed my mind about the Bible. I don't know. I never... it just seems parochial. I hate saying that. There's a Bible in North Hampton, Masachusetts, that Johnathon Edwards used. Let's get that. "Grace is but glory begun and glory is but grace perfected." I made my Bible selection. It's awkwardly worded. Oh, God. A what? How do you know? And I'm worried about the White House making that suggestion. Wasn't that a rumor? All right, listen. I've asked for a forced depletion report on action in Khundu. Slatterly got Jack Reese. The best scenario is that simply by engaging, the Arkutu lay down their weapons, but that doesn't seem likey, so we'd lose people. More if they go into the countryside. Yeah. I'm sorry? Good. You should. Hey, is this it? Good to meet you. Of course. This? It's huge. Actually, it can't be. The First Lady has to hold this in her hand. This one's going to take the First Lady, the Chief Justice and the Second Circuit Court of Appeals. Okay... Mr. Carlton? Sorry. Thanks. Charlie's going to take care of you.  Charlie, that Bible's the size of a Volkswagon. Can we get the Washington Bible? Thank you. Toby been taking his pants off again? That's just something he does. How's it going? Good. Yeah. What's hard is that foreign policy has become a statement of what we won't do. "A new doctrine for a new century, based not just on our interests, but on our values across the world." Well, that's pretty spicey stuff. Yeah, I know. Why is a Khundunese life worth less to me than an American life? That was ballsy. You Tom Bailey's son? Talk about the very model of a modern Major General. We'll send condolences. What's next? Okay. Well, if he's old enough to marry Jerry Lee Lewis, I guess he's old enough to be king of Bhutan. What's next? Coast Guards got it? What's happening? I'm sorry, what's happening in the REK? Well, a proclamation ought to do the trick. What's the CIA know that I should know? All right, thank you. Yeah. Hey, I changed my mind. Not the Washington Bible. Yeah. Yeah, I'm going to use my father's. Did you talk to Hutchinson?  Tell Josh I'll just be a minute, okay? Did he tell me to shut up and let him run the Pentagon? How many? So Hutchinson know I've seen forced depletion. He should be pissed at me, not Jack Reese. Don't worry about it. Right? Don't worry about it. Clark says neighbors are swapping family members in Khundu. Also, there's a new king of Bhutan. And he's been bar mitzvaed and everything. Hey, this guy you hired for the Inauguration speech gave me a little back chat a few minutes ago. Yeah, he was using a floor speech about El Salvador I gave 98 years ago to demonstrate that the U.S. should send troops to Khundu. Rhetorically, I said, "Why is a Khundunese life worth less to me than an American life?" And he said, "I dont know, sir, but it is." Thank you. Hey, Josh. There's intelligence that Khundunese neighbors in the country are swapping family members. For the night, they're swapping family members you know, and sleeping in each other's houses. What's going on? State? Tell them... It's not. The language is being polished. Some of which have my name on them. So tell Jeff Tomlison and baby Bob to take a deep knee bend, would you? I'm just as big a cotton candy ass as they are. You're just going to let that hang in the air? Damn right. No. Charlie, I'm going to change my mind again on te Bible. Aren't you afraid that one day I'm just going to kick your ass like it's never been kicked? Let's go with the Washington Bible. Just put it on a plane. What do the Freemasons have to do with it? Take a train. Buy three tickets. Are you trying to tell me that Freemasons don't like me? Thank you. I saw C.J. smiling before. Has something good happened? What? I didn't? It's not different. Well, then it was a dodged bullet. Leo, come on... You're being paranoid. You think in your wildest dreams that Hutchinson's running an offense? He's that pissed that I asked for forced Depletion Report he's going to show me in Danny's byline I go to Khundu and here's what happened in Bermuda?  Abbey's already gone to bed. I should get up there. No.   Good night. Abbey. Abigail. Abbey, the kids are eating sugar. How you doing? You know I gave the kids candy all the time, right? Yes. Well, it was for sale, and I wanted it. I'm going to stay up for a bit and read and watch some news. His grandkids were in here? I don't. For the record... Frederick the Great told his generals... to defend everything is to defend nothing. I don't really know what that means, do you? Well, that makes two of us. I'll be in soon. I was their dealer. Live with it. Leo McGarry, please. We're for freedom of speech everywhere. We're for freedom to worship everywhere. We're for freedom to learn... for everybody. And because, in our time, you can build a bomb in your country and bring it to my country, what goes on in you country is very much my business. And so we are for freedom from tyranny everywhere, whether in the guise of political oppresion, Toby, or economic slavery, Josh, or religious fanaticism, C.J. That most fundamental idea cannot be met with merely our support. It has to be met with our strength. Diplomatically, economically, materially. And if pharoah still don't free the slaves, then he gets the plagues, or my cavalry, whichever gets there first. The USTR will go crazy and say that we're not considering global trade. Committee members will go crazy and say I haven't consulted enough. And the Arab world will just go indescriminately crazy. No country has ever had a doctrine of intervention when only humanitarian interests were at stake. That streaks going to end Sunday at noon. So, if you're on board with this, what I need you to do...  Do I just keep standing here? "Set free the oppressed, break every yoke, clothe the naked and your light shall break forth like the dawn, and the glory of the Lord shall be your rear guard." That was Isaiah. Who? Well, then here's to swimmin' with bow-legged women. I think you're wrong. But if you're right, then okay. We should all have a little skin in this. So we're doing well so far. Sunday noon. Not because, no. Not because of Laurel and Hardy. That was simply the confluence of the final, you know, and... also, by the way, from the mouths of babe-- like yourself. Seriously, from the mouths of babes and clowns come-- Listen, there's no reason why anyone needs to know about Laurel and Hardy. Too cold for a parade. Bunch of tanned-ass Southerners. Which is to the south of New Hampshire. Don't tell me geographic stereotypes. I walked to school every morning in weather colder than this. That's right, baby. Just a camel hair coat, leather gloves, a varsity scarf and these wits. It's here? What is the problem? It was in New York. It could have gotten here on a fast horse. And? Because? And it didn't come in last night... Three for the freemasons and one for the Bible. Three hotel rooms and four train tickets. Okay. You know what? Washington didn't bring his own Bible, he just assumed one would be provided, which, frankly, isn't unreasonable. Guy wants you to swear an oath on a Bible, he ought to be packing a Bible. Washington had someone get one from across the street. Just common courtesy I think. "Place your hand on this Bible." And, "Oh, can I use your Bible?" That's not right. Why are they talking to me about the order of the balls? Good evening. Everything all right? They're saying I'm rewriting the Constitution on the back of a napkin. They're saying on FOX that a guy who couldn't run a local sheriff's department wants to send troops around the world. They're saying it's liberalism with a grenade launcher. But they're not saying it was badly written, so that's something. And they sure as hell know I was serious, so that's something else. Congratulations, folks. We've got ourselves a doctrine. Will, I think some of these people don't know who your dad is. Will's the youngest son of Tom Bailey, who's the only guy in the world with a better title than mine. He was Supreme Commander, NATO Allied Forces Europe. We didn't know we were going to do this. I would have asked you to invite him. Actually, I meant he could be here now when I tell you Toby's asked me to commission you as his deputy. Toby wants to make you deputy. I'm appointing you Deputy Communications Director. It covers a wide range of areas of policy and execution and counsel to me. Yes.  Excuse me? Hi.  Sam's going to be promoted to Senior Counselor if he loses the 47th.  That's what you want to hear from your new Communications-- There's a promise that I ask everyone who works here to make. Never doubt that a small group of thoughtful and commited citizens can change the world. You know why? William Bailey, reposing special trust and confidence in your integrety, prudence and ability, I designate you to the post of Deputy White House Director of Communications and Special Assistant to the President. And I do authorize you to execute and fulfill the duties of that office with all the powers and privileges and subject to the conditions prescribed. It is affirmed by my signature... ...and affixed with the Seal of of the Unites States. And it is done so on this day and in this place. Congratulations.  You know, it's easy to watch the news and think of Khundunese as either hapless victims or crazed butchers, and it turns out that's not true. I got this intelligence summary this afternoon. "Mothers are standing in front of tanks." And we're going to go get their backs. An hour ago, I ordered Fitzwallace to have UCOMM deploy a brigade of the 82nd Airborne, the 101st Air Assualt, and a Marine Expeditionary Unit to Khundu to stop the violence. The 101st are the Screaming Eagles. The Marines are with the 22nd M.E.U., trained at Camp Lejuene, some of them very recently. I'm sorry, everyone, but this is a work night. I don't understand, did we just get put on call waiting or something? Wendall's answering the phones at U.S. European Commamnd? Is he placing a bet? Thank you. Me? I get it. And I agree with you. I can tell by the way you laughed in my face at the suggestion that I was. I heard that. Why? I've told him over and over about money and endorsements from outside the district. Why is he going to Brentwood? What does Joey say? The right to privacy's a value, so is clean air. OMB? Deficit-nuetral, we've had 14 meetings. What's wrong with booze and a comfortable pickup? Scoring. Is there going to be a democrat tax plan, or am I going to be stuck in NEC scoring hell for the rest of my term? What do salmon runs have to do with it? Last week it was a banana embargo. Is Congress opening a restaurant? Aren't there quite a few reasons? Miss Humentashen. Leo said just now that there was going to be an NEC briefing on scoring and tell her what I said. No there's not. Mr. Ambassador, I'm sorry to keep you waiting. I was just in the White House Situation Room. I've just taken your airport...  ...clearing the way for the 101st Air Assualt to take the capitol. 7,000 troops, 25 battle tanks, 15 Apache attack helicopters, and three destroyers. Strictly speaking, I conquered your country without the paperwork. No, it's not. It's in the midst of a one-sided slaughtering of an entire people. Both the Secretary General of the United Nations and the Vatican have pleaded with President Nzele for a cease-fire and both the U.N. and the Holy Father have struck out to the peril of 115,000 Induye men, women, and God knows children, particularly the boys. The heads of Ghana, Nigeria and Zaire have similairly sent packing. The Red Cross has been denied entry on three seperate occasions in the last ten says. President Nzele has 36 hours to give the command to his troops to hand over their weapons to the 82nd Divison Airborne Division of the United States Army. At 36 hours and one minute, I give the order for the 101st Air Assualt to take Bitanga and run up our flag. I skipped breakfast. Anybody want coffee or something? Right. On the other hand, 20% of your youth is unemployed. They're just living to live. Yeah, it helps when someone else is picking up the bigger ticket items like a national defense. I'm sorry? Excellent. Yes, absolutely, send them in. Yeah, whatever, hang on a second.  What do you need? No, that's all right. What do you need? Come here. If you leave, I'll kill you. I'm sorry, Jean-Paul, I'll have to cut it short. Josh has gotten himself in a jam. But I'll see you on the plane tonight, and I'll look forward to continue the discussion on, you know, what's wrong with me. What? You think the Republicans are rolling out their tax plan? Thank God. 'Cause we can roll out ours and I don't have to sit through another seven scoring meetings. Why not respond Saturday or Sunday? Better yet, let's go first. Call the press in, and I'll do it right now. Toby? It'll be ready tomorrow? I say we respond to theirs with ours, but we do it tomorrow or Sunday. Then that's where we do it. And announce from the White House. That's a killer decision. But let's lean towards Sam and say we keep our mouths shut in California and then come out fighting Monday morning. No response from the White House?  There's my response.  Sing it, Larry. 15% cut across the board? Cutting capital gains 50%! And it's actually going to cost? I'm not an economist, but no... Wait, I am an economist. So, their plan will do what, C.J.? Explode the deficit. Will it stimulate the economy, Josh? Josh gets extra credit for being funny and right at the same time, and how long do I have to stay quiet, Toby? And not kill Sam? And so I shall. Man, I'm sorry about this.  The French have denied us access to their airspace. I'm not sure why they think we're going to need it to get from here to Africa, but what the hell. This weekend's all about you. Get up there. This is going to be about France. Did we accidently trap people in a theme park?  Yeah? Leo, tell those poncy little hairdressers I'm going to shove a loaf of bread up their ass... Mrs. Hottentot? Yeah, where are they? What do you mean? They're under arrest? Did they rob the bar? Uh-huh. And what did Charlie do? Toby and Charlie were arrested in a bar fight. Really? Everytime we come to Southern California we are absolutely the Clampetts. I came... You really don't want to shake up a campaign like this at this point in the election calendar. Guys, we've got to keep our voices down a little. Scott... Why are you putting Sam next to business? No, I'm just curious. Josh... Tell Toby to take over the campaign. Yeah.  Leo, I just fired Scott Holcomb. Toby, who, with Charlie, is meeting with a bails bondsman right now, has to come off the payroll for a week. What? What do you mean they've been taken? We secured the airport. What are we doing? We're coming home. Tell Ghana to tell Nzele he's got 9 hours and 20 minutes before I take him. Thanks. Lieutenant. How old are you? Let's go. How come it's never people with six months to live who are taken hostage? I mean there's so much of it, you'd think once in a while we'd catch a break. Yeah. Would you all excuse me?  Yeah? What happens if, screw the deadline, we just go to full deployment right now? All right, we got to go get them. All right, then, on my order. They're here? Who are they? Is the three-year-old in there? This is my first time doing this particular one. Good morning, I'm Jed Bartlet. Mr. and Mrs. Hernandez? Mrs. Rowe? Mrs. Halley, is it all right if I call you Diane? Are you Betty? Are you three years old? Are you scared now? Don't be. Diane, do you mind if Betty sat in the next room with my secretary, Ms. Fiderer?  Please. Mm-hmm. Yeah. It was taken off of Kundunese TV. Yeah, sure. I'm afraid so, sir, yes. We're currently negotiating for Red Cross access so they can get medical attention. I'm sorry, I can't tell you that. I'm sorry, I can't tell you that either. Mr. Hernandez, I can only imagine... No, ma'am, I can't. Excuse me, please. Let's go. Why a wet team? Why the CIA wet team? We're not near water. I had to ask. What's it called? Go. At what point do we start to worry? Hack was 2 hours and 47 minutes. Yeah, but it's four hours and ten minutes now. I've got three parents, a wife and a three-year-old up there. At what point do I tell them what's going on?  Ask him to confirm it again. What's that? What does that mean? What's Red Haven? Fitz, what's going on? It was a suicide bombing.  I want Threat Con Charlie for Africa and Europe.  Why don't you go talk to the families? Hello. Oh, okay. I didn't ask for five? She's allowed to do that? Ah, it's okay. Thanks. Yeah, what the hell's going on? I know and when she called me at five, I was going to say call me back in an hour and go back to sleep. I was going to do it myself. Yeah, and now I missed the whole thing. Operation Resting Eagle. You know I was having a little fun in my sleep. It's how I relax. Wait, let me put my glasses on. Something's turning me on about you, and I can't tell why. Oh, yeah! I got in late last night. We didn't even leave Nashville until after ten. I ended up touring a weapons research facility in Oak Ridge. They've got one of the most powerful reactors in the world. They were able to show me an insulin molecule. Basically scoop up two zinc ions. You're a scientist and your still making fun of this? Anyway, look, I'm trying to tell you something. You know what? That's okay, I'm going to get that. No, I'll get them, thanks. Lay out the papers, yes, and today I'd like you to alphabetize them. Anyway when we finally got back from Nashville, Leo was waiting. I don't know but we're going to be interested in that less right now than we are in other things. Foreign Ops came out of mark-up. It's good. They only cut two billion and shifted half a billion from the Sub Saharan to Western Europe because I guess the crippling hunger in Provence has given the lactose intolerant a problem with-- I don't know but I can live with all that. Clancy Bangart attached an amendment. Stipulating that Foreign Ops dollars wouldn't go to any overseas clinics that council abortion. Yeah. This is the Senate. They can do that. No, there was no indication. Clancy Bangart doesn't let me know what he's thinking. There's a handful, a handful and a half of cranky conservative Senators who want this stuff, and were waiting to pounce. It's what happened. Yeah. I'm sorry? I don't know yet. I don't know. I'm not prepared to do that yet. I don't know. I'm not prepared to do that yet. I know what the gag rule is. That's great except people are starving to death, and they're dying of disease to death, and they can't cook the Bill of Rights. I really don't know Abbey, the day hasn't started yet. Will's a good boy. Yeah. Marblehead? No, some of us call her Marblehead. Cause you're a pirate? I know what they were. Today? Yeah, you did. We don't have to ask you to screw up Abbey, you do by your... I can't publicly reprimand you, it wouldn't play well. We save you for other things. You want to hear about Max Weber? German thinker Max Weber said that politics is the "slow boring of hard boards and that anyone who seeks to do it must risk his own soul". You know what that means? It means that change comes in excruciating increments for those who want it. You're trying to move mountains. It takes lifetimes. But Zoey Bartlet is the newest Daughter of the American Revolution so I like our chances for the long run. Yes. Till the bulk of the bill is appropriated. Yeah. You don't. We will. Keep talking, I'm going to turn off the light. No, I have to get up early.  He's telling me the deadline for Columbia's recertification is midnight tonight.  Didn't I sign those papers all ready? Just to check, they're going to tell me that the narco-trafficantes are running the Parliament, but that we should recertify them as an ally in the drug war. You mean calling them an enemy. And the deadline for that is today, right? Jessie, left turn, maintain altitude? Leo, hang on a second.  What's the problem on the ground? Then what happens? And then what happens? Yeah. You'll keep me briefed? Thank you. Listen, we've got a problem up here. Well, it should cost more, don't you think? You got a lot more of these stories? I've got a plane full of reporters up here.  Charlie, stay in here, would you? Here's what's going on. The light that indicates that the landing gear is locked didn't go on, which usually indicates that there's something wrong with the light. But what they're going to do is, they've sent a fighter jet to fly up alongside and get visual confirmation that it's down, and then we land. Here's the tricky part. The press can't know this is going on. There are two issues. One is that the Nikkei's about to open, the other is national security. We can't broadcast that Air Force One is up in the air over West Virginia and can't land. Okay. Yeah, it's confirmed. Five infantrymen, they're on their way back. No. I'm going to do that when I get on the ground. Will, I was supposed to get a Columbia recertification briefing in the car. Are you in a position to do it up here? That statue says it's got to be in person. That Columbia is an ally in the drug war. So what's the plan? At night? Is that gonna work? All right, let's get this over with and land. Is it down? Why not? What's next? How close do we fly to the tower? At what altitude? And we just can't stay up here for a couple of days and wait till there's a moon? What else? Larry, would you go back and mention that to C.J.? Is cocaine production in Columbia up or down? And how many of our extradition requests have been honored? None. Any good news? Anything we can hang our hat on? That's good news? What they spend it on? If you tell me coccaine... So, I recertify them in recognition of the fact that they took our anti-drug money and went to Seaworld. All right, leave that stuff with me. How many times-- seriously, Leo-- how many times has the Black Caucus on retreats, at dinners... how many times have they...? There was a dinner two years where the Vice Chairs literally pulled out a map of Africa. They wanted me to make Africa a priority. And now they're making me look like a idiot. Well, now they want me to make Brooklyn a priority. And when did these guys become Smoot and Hawley? Hang on a second.  Jessie Weiskopf's coming down, and he ain't smiling. Okay, and how long do you think this'll take? An hour and 15? Where are we? All right, pretty soon though, we got to stop just flying around. This is starting to qualify as space travel now. The Falcon couldn't get a visual read, so we're going to buzz the tower at Andrews in a Boeing 747. Weiskopf says it's going to be an hour and 15 minutes. I'm going to call the families from up here of the five guys. Thanks. Will. I'm going to call the families now. They're going to send up some information. Can you help me out? Just give this to C.J. You should read it on the way. Do me a favor. Find out what happens if I don't certify Columbia. Find out what happens if I decertify Columbua. If I'm going to be up here, I may as well do something. The fly-by's going to take about an hour and 15 minutes. Would you tell C.J.? We lose some money. Right, but at the moment, I'm more concerned with our credibility. He told me at the Summit of the Americas that he'd work toward crop diversification. Did he mean opium and coke? Yes, but he's not helping us, so why should I give him political cover? Listen, I'm serious. What would happen if I don't recertify Columbia? I can't what? Why?  Because the deadline was midnight... And it has to be delivered... The actual signed paper? This is really how the world works. I want this plane to land! All right, thanks. Why are you so eager to get in this game? Seriously. This is a cash game, Debbie. These are hard working people blowing off some steam and taking each other off their coin. We don't play for matchsticks and we don't play... ...Okay, can I ask you something? I forgot to have Charlie to draw cash for me, can you float me a little? Leo, C.J. swears that on the equinox, which is today, you can stand an egg on end. Yeah, you can play. Where? Well that's why these are unmanned right? All we lost was money? Aren't they saying detonate the plane? Well, what do they want me to do, call Chigorin and ask if we can go in and get our spy plane back? Wait, you're serious. They want me to call Chigorin? And ask him for the plane back without telling him we were spying?  Do they? Hang on. Yeah, this isn't going to work. You're fine?  Check. You were full of crap. You had jack-high or something? Hang on. Will, why are you dressed like an officer in the Air Force? You're a reservist? I didn't know that.  Did you know that? I had no idea. What do you do? And this is your weekend up? Well good for you. Where are you stationed? They're ready?  Play my seat. Are we getting somewhere? And what do I do when Chigorin tells me that Hawaii's not really part of America, and he wants to change the alphabet to Cyrillic?  What the hell. What area are we trolling in? Yes. We were spying for him? Okay, this phone call you're going to set up with Chigorin...it's like for a White House bloopers reel or something? All right. Yeah. Are the two related?  All right. What do we have?  But President Bartlet, we have a terrific search-and-recovery team. We'll just go get that plane for you. "Our folks"? You really think I'd use those words with the Russian President? "Much as I have to protect Kaliningrad, sir, which brings us to the question of what the hell were you doing flying over it?" Did it? What was the other mission? I tell him it was an environmental mission? Okay, and he's not going to want to take pictures of coastal erosion at Coney Island? We were on an environmental mission for Finland? That's what we've come up with? Set up the call. He's on? Let's go.  Mr. President, this is President Bartlet. What the hell? Okay, you know what, I'm going to have to call you back.  Bamboo, they want me to get into the motorcade. What's going on? I'm all right. I was on the phone with Chigorin. He's got code word clearance. Was anyone in the room? Nobody was hurt?  You all right?  What about you?  Will, how many fingers am I holding up? I don't know if you've met Ron Butterfield, the head of my detail. Where's Charlie? But if he's heard what happened, he's going to be trying to get here... No, I'm telling you that if Charlie heard there were bullets, he's going to overpower whoever's trying to... Come here. It's bulletproof glass in the windows, okay. You want to kill me, you're going to have to do it from inside the building. I'm surprised your guys managed to keep Fiderer in her chair. I would have thought she'd be the first one through the d... No, here we are. No one was hurt, someone shot at the press briefing room from the sidewalk. Will's sitting right outside, and Toby and C.J. are standing right there. Yeah. This was just a crazy guy, Leo. Come on. You guys playing again? President Chigorin, it's Jed Bartlet again. I'm sorry about being abrupt before, but I bet if you turn on CNN international right now you'll see... Yeah, there you go. It's not a big deal, but they shut us down for a little bit. By the way when they crash the building they don't crash all of it. The Situation Room still works. Mr. President, a little while ago an unmanned B-UAV drone crashed, we think somewhere inside Kaliningrad, as a matter of fact. Apparently they don't respond, you know, quite the way you'd like when there's a sudden shift in the weather. Well, like I say, it was a UAV, it was taking satellite pictures of coastal erosion in the Baltic Sea. The Finns know about this. We'd like to send a special operations team ten kilometres west of Borsakova to retrieve it. I'm sorry, sir? Are you getting that translation right? You campaigned on the environment, Mr. President. Coastal erosion in the Baltic Sea. Well, the problem is our UAV's have a self-detonating capability and our people know how to disarm it, and I wouldn't want to put your guys at risk. It's proprietary technology, Peter. I know it seems... Yes, Mr. President. This isn't working anymore. Peter... I understand. I meant...  I wasn't referring to the change in weather, sir. He's yelling pretty loud at Leo now. Don't do that Peter. We were taking pictures of Kaliningrad. We were taking pictures of Kaliningrad. We take pictures of black market nuclear materials being moved out the back doors of suppositories and into trucks. The materials are being sold to non-governmental elements and, well, that's what we were doing. Rogue engineers, military scientists, and ex-KGB. It's just as big of a problem for you as it is for us, but you're not dealing with it, so we were taking pictures of Kaliningrad. We're going to have to trust each other a little Peter. So we're going to share the pictures we got. Not the technology we used to get them. Otherwise I'm detonating it and neither of us see the pictures. We're going to have to trust each other. Our two countries have stopped the world from annihilating itself for 60 years because of conversations like this one. Why don't you talk it over? If he calls back we'll have a deal. In the mean time, one hand. Bring your wallet. Hurry it up. They're going to call us back in a second. Debbie, do something. Thank you. Is the pastrami from Krupins? Tissue paper thin?  Damn it. Uh, it turns out it has to go to the Secretary of State. There's a law: It's 3-USC-20. It goes to the Secretary of State. But we'll take care of it. Why did you take a cab? I'm sorry? You know what's in here? It's okay. You've talked to Suzanne? You've talked to Suzanne? You were wrong. If we're going to do this, we got to start tonight, now, and I need you thinking now and not giving up... What about "It's none of your business?" Apologize and move on. Accept responsibilty. You don't need to disclose details. She's going to take care of that for you. You're going to be the dinner special for two months, and then you've got two and half years to get the nomination. In the middle of MS, it looked like we were never going to recover, and we did. John... Well, I'm sorry, Mr. Vice President, if my multiple sclerosis was a bummer for your sex life. How the hell did you do this to us?! You can't resign, John. It's a terrible signal to send. Is there more? Is there another shoe, 'cause if it's a series of... Didn't you have any sense that this was the kind of person who would do this? Well, I want you to sleep on it. I want all of us to sleep on it. Why did you take a cab? I'm sorry? You know what's in here? It's okay. Okay.  Yeah, we're going to need a new Vice President. How were they able to rent a van?  "A torrential downpour in the Pacific Northwest." "A torrential downpour." And they're just missing? The five of them, they're just missing? We're going to work on that? Threat Con Bravo. Find them. Threat Con Bravo. Leo and I will be back.  Thanks. Yeah, listen, I don't think this is going to come as a galloping shock to anyone here, but last May I ordered a Special Ops unit to kill Abdul Shareef, and that's what they did, and we we made it look like what got reported. See, I said we took Shareef, and they said fine, and then you went on talking for another five, ten minutes. Yes? Well, I just ordered Threat Con Bravo, so people are going to be seeing some heightened security this weekend. We did. Tell him, sister. Oh, hey, Toby, big day. The house, a masterstroke. Come on, give us a kiss. Okay. Yes? No, I don't need help. Yeah... I need help. What I have? Well, it's been said that I have a pleasant speaking voice and oratorical style. On paper? No. Yeah. Yeah, right away I would think. Except at this minute, I have to go over and meet the agents who are beening detailed to Zoey for France. They speak French. As well as being secret service agents. I didn't mean they speak French and so therefore are guarding Zoey in France. I have been thinking that I'd like to talk about creativity. Why don't you get started on some thoughts, and I'll join you. Hi. Are you friends of Zoey's? Hey. Wes, thanks so much for doing this. I know it's not what you like. So, let's talk about how this is going to work. Well, here's my question. These guys look pretty young to me, and I'm looking for something very specific with this detail. This is a father-daughter situation, and so what I think I'm looking for in terms of protection would best be categorized as, well, overwhelming force. Do they have that? Do they have the ability to just overwhelm any danger that might...? Do you have overwh...? Do they have overwhelming force? Wow! This one here tossed Wesley like a bag of potato chips. You guys know each other? Oh, good. Okay. Well, Ellie's still up and running. When do you start?  Are you going back to the campus? Okay, well, let me ask you this. Would you consider instead of living in France with your boyfriend for three months, staying here, living in your room, being a candy striper, or surfer? Or surfing? You could spend the summer working in a pet shop. We could play Yahtzee, and watch movies at night. What daughters would do their whole lives if I had my way.  Before I forget, if something comes up and you're faced with the choice of killing the boyfriend or not killing the boyfriend -- kill the boyfriend.  Excuse me. What's the registry? What are we doing on the ground? How long have they been at it? All right, let's give them another hour. Then have the Coast Gurad close the port. Is it the port of Portland? Is it really the port of Portland? They're going to lose $700 million a day 'cause these five guys are missing. And I just now got why we're having this meeting. Portland. Torrential rain in the Pacific Northwest. Screw the hour. Let's close it down. Thanks. Well, it's about the last thing they're going to get to decide. So you choose Tuesday. 20 years later, look what happens. Good! You're here! I want to make some changes. Look at you. There is no way you have three adult children. I do, but the neck... Eh, it seems empty to me. Attention should be drawn to it. Nice job with the, you know, raising of the kid. They're real, too. They can cut glass. Aw, damn it, what are these, then? Yeah. Get in the car. We'll do it on the fly. Get in the car... Small ones-- instead of talking about the internal muse, I want to talk about the limits of reason, and about passion and intuition in American life. You can eat them, too. They're gumballs. Coop? Yes. Let's think. What do you think about using the Eudora Welty quote instead of the Gandhi? "You must be the change" - is that it? "You must be the change you wish to see in the world." Sounds too much like Eastern philosophy. 'Cause Ghandi lived in India? Well, let's write that one. Yeah. Yeah. Thanks, Will, for the help. Thank you! Yeah, no. I've got it down here in this folder, and on some napkins in my pocket. Oh, yeah, I'll be fine. You know, unless something comes up. Well, for instance, I just realized I don't have access to my pockets anymore. But, you know, what are you going to do?